[Amit Varma]: One of the many ways in which we don't keep up with the times is in adjusting our self-image.
[Amit Varma]: My image of myself has always been that of a creator, though I would not have used that
[Amit Varma]: word creator when I was younger. I thought of myself as someone who would write books
[Amit Varma]: one day. When I fell in love with cinema as a kid, I thought I would make movies one day.
[Amit Varma]: But then in my early teens, I chose between the two. I decided that writing books was
[Amit Varma]: easier as it didn't involve other people. But here's the thing, if I was born 30 years
[Amit Varma]: after I was actually born, these might not be the outlets I would aspire to. We are surrounded
[Amit Varma]: today by so many other ways to express ourselves, to tell stories, to connect with others. Maybe
[Amit Varma]: I'd want to be a YouTuber. Maybe I'd dream of being a showrunner for a web series. Maybe
[Amit Varma]: I'd want to be the Picasso of Instagram or the Shakespeare of stand-up comedy. And hey,
[Amit Varma]: who knows, maybe I'd want to be a podcaster.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Varun Duggirala, a creator and podcaster
[Amit Varma]: whose personal journey feels quite different from mine, partly because he's almost a decade
[Amit Varma]: younger, but who has recently been trying to figure out the exact things that I've been
[Amit Varma]: obsessing about. First, let me give you a bit of his bare bones bio. Varun did engineering,
[Amit Varma]: then he did Maskom, then he worked for a while as a producer in MTV and Channel V. Then he
[Amit Varma]: started his own advertising agency, The Glitch, which was acquired a couple of years ago by
[Amit Varma]: the global giant WPP. He also runs a podcast called Advertising is Dead, and has a newsletter
[Amit Varma]: called Unschooled, as well as a YouTube show called The Varun Duggi Show, in which I was
[Amit Varma]: a recent guest. Now, what is a common obsession here? It's understanding how the world has
[Amit Varma]: changed for creators. You could say that by joining music television, Varun jumped in
[Amit Varma]: at the deep end at the end of the old world. And then when he stuck off on his own in 2009,
[Amit Varma]: a new world was forming. Now, here are the salient points of this new world, which is
[Amit Varma]: still evolving. One, anyone can be a creator. You don't need fancy training and expensive
[Amit Varma]: equipment and the backing of a big platform to create stuff. A smartphone is enough. Two,
[Amit Varma]: the relationship between creators and their audiences has gradually become more intimate
[Amit Varma]: with less need of a platform in between. And this has threatened advertising as well, which
[Amit Varma]: is a pertinent point given that Varun for more than a decade has been a creator working
[Amit Varma]: in the advertising business. And three, these new ways of how we connect with our audiences
[Amit Varma]: have changed not just the way we create, but also who we are. I've said time and again
[Amit Varma]: on the show that learning the art of long conversations changed who I am as a person.
[Amit Varma]: In this episode, Varun echoes that sentiment. I enjoy chatting with him because I think
[Amit Varma]: like with most successful creators in this new world, what you see is what you get. Varun
[Amit Varma]: is straightforward, curious, humble about what he does not know, hungry to know more,
[Amit Varma]: and always thinking about the world, getting meta, as it were. So I enjoyed this conversation
[Amit Varma]: that goes over many of these areas. But I have to warn you that it doesn't touch the
[Amit Varma]: emotional depths of the last couple of episodes I did with Gazala Wahab and Prem Panikkar.
[Amit Varma]: This conversation won't make you cry, but it can make you think and what's not to like
[Amit Varma]: about that. Before we begin, though, let's take a quick commercial break, which because
[Amit Varma]: I don't actually have a sponsor for this episode is actually about my own writing course. Why
[Amit Varma]: don't you sign up?
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. One of the great joys of the lockdown for me was discovering how much I
[Amit Varma]: enjoy teaching what I've learned over the years. And my online course, The Art of Clear
[Amit Varma]: Writing is now open for registration. In this course, through four webinars spread over
[Amit Varma]: four weekends, I share all I know about the craft and practice of clear writing. There
[Amit Varma]: are many exercises, much interaction. And over the year that I've taught this course,
[Amit Varma]: a lively writing community has formed itself. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or
[Amit Varma]: about $150. And the April classes begin on April 3. So if you're interested, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing. That's indiancut.com slash clear
[Amit Varma]: writing. Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to
[Amit Varma]: work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Varun, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me. This is I'm really looking forward to this one.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, this is I have, of course, just been on your show, the Varun Duggi show, which
[Amit Varma]: was fun. And also, of course, you have your long running podcast advertising is dead.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when I was kind of researching for the show for this episode, I came across
[Amit Varma]: this quote by yours about how you don't do any prep, like you switch on 15 minutes before
[Amit Varma]: you're recording, and you switch off 10 minutes afterwards. And my process is somewhat different.
[Amit Varma]: So I thought this is almost like, you know, Tendulkar and Ravid together in the popular
[Amit Varma]: stereotypes that it's effortless for one and so much effort for the other, though, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: like I keep telling people about Tendulkar and Ravid that the stereotype is completely
[Amit Varma]: false, because Tendulkar also put in a heck of a lot of work and Ravid also had immense
[Amit Varma]: natural talent. So it's an unfortunate stereotype. But to come away from those particular superstars
[Amit Varma]: to you, tell me a little bit about your early years, like what is intriguing about you is
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, if one just sees the image of Varun Duggirala, co founder of The Glitch,
[Amit Varma]: content creator, productivity guru, all of those things, a podcaster, you get the image
[Amit Varma]: of a guy who's like, full on hipster type, you know, the would be at home in Bandra,
[Amit Varma]: but you actually grew up in Kakinada in Andhra Pradesh. So tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: What was that like growing up in Kakinada?
[Guest]: So it's interesting you said Kakinada, right? So Kakinada was its original name. And then
[Guest]: it eventually became Kakinada when I was growing up. And I always thought it was cool to call
[Guest]: it Co-Canada. Even when you're young and you think okay, we're going to call it Co-Canada.
[Guest]: But yeah, yeah. So interesting, right? I grew up in so Kakinada just for everyone is a coast
[Guest]: of Andhra Pradesh, East Godavari district. And a large part of families there. I mean,
[Guest]: everyone grew up there. So standard, South Indian, Telugu, Brahmin family, everybody
[Guest]: is either a doctor or an engineer, the doctors stay back home, engineers go to America, literally
[Guest]: like the standard template is my family. So you will find a large part of my engineering
[Guest]: family in, in San Francisco, in Boston, you know, the regular spots as such. And my family
[Guest]: back home was a multi-specialty hospital. I didn't know you had to pay for medical treatment
[Guest]: as much as you did for the longest part because every specialization, there was some uncle,
[Guest]: or there was somebody there, right? So that's how I grew up. I actually grew up in a hospital.
[Guest]: My dad's a surgeon, my grandmom, even though she was, she practiced as a gynecologist,
[Guest]: was an MBBS, but because she became a doctor when she did, she, she basically delivered
[Guest]: generations and families and stuff like that. So I grew up on the on the first floor of
[Guest]: a hospital, had walked into an operation theater from the youngest of ages with a mask and
[Guest]: a cap and watch operations, fainted in one of those and then I realized I will never
[Guest]: be a doctor because I just couldn't deal with it. And, but it was great. I mean, I think
[Guest]: I grew up at an interesting time there as well, because I think my parents were not
[Guest]: the traditional kinds. I grew up with my dad and mom listening to Pink Floyd and, and Andy
[Guest]: Purple and, and Michael Bolton on the other end of things. And, and, and they had me when
[Guest]: they were very young. They were in the early 20s when they had me. So we kind of grew up
[Guest]: together. Dad was still studying, mom was still also studying. And, and Kakinada is
[Guest]: a great place because I had a good set of friends at play, but I also had got my own
[Guest]: space and in hindsight, I mean, I think a lot of how my mind works still originates
[Guest]: from a lot of stuff I learned as a kid over there, but yeah, it feels like a different
[Amit Varma]: world.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And, and, you know, once in a, not even a one-liner and a half-liner, you sort of
[Amit Varma]: spoke about your Kakinada years as being full of Chiranjeevi and Michael Jackson. But one
[Amit Varma]: thing, you know, that I'm really kind of curious about, and that I ask all of my guests at
[Amit Varma]: different ages, whether they're in the 50s, 60s, 40s, like me or 30s or whatever is, and
[Amit Varma]: I feel it also gives me a great sense of what it was like to grow up at that time in India.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me the years of your childhood and what kind of stuff were you consuming?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how much did you get to read? What was the access to books like? What kind of music
[Amit Varma]: did you listen to? Like, I remember when I was growing up in the 80s and the 90s, it
[Amit Varma]: was all the, you know, the stereotypical music, like you named Pink Floyd, and there will
[Amit Varma]: be the Deep Purples and all of that. And you had to make an effort to look beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: The world was not at your fingertips as it were. So what were your sort of early influences
[Amit Varma]: in terms of, you know, music, films, books? What was that like for you?
[Guest]: So I actually had a lot of access to both music and books growing up. Mom and Dad read
[Guest]: a lot, still do. So I had access to a wide spread of books, right? So, and they almost
[Guest]: like pushed me to read more, primarily because I felt it's a good thing to do. You're gonna
[Guest]: get to know more about the world if you read. And that's what I ended up doing. So on one
[Guest]: end, you would have your standard, you know, you'd have your Annette Bliton, and like,
[Guest]: keep pronouncing her last name wrong. Or on the other end, you also end up getting books,
[Guest]: which so I was a huge, I have to admit this, I spent the first three years of my life watching
[Guest]: the same movie, which was Jungle Book. Because I would walk across the street, there would
[Guest]: be a video lending library, which was a thing. And they only had like this one tape for kids.
[Guest]: Everything else was Telugu movies or a couple of stuff from abroad. I just picked this up
[Guest]: and just and they would like just keep it because I would go every day, watch it, return
[Guest]: it and then again, go back the next day. And they were just like a couple of houses away.
[Guest]: So growing up, I actually was I say I'm a weird mixture of being very extroverted but
[Guest]: yet extremely a person with a need to kind of have time to himself. I was that as a kid,
[Guest]: like I would go out and play but I wanted to come back into my room and and play with
[Guest]: my GI Joe's and play with a lot of Lego and growing up at that time, it was a lot about
[Guest]: playing with toys by myself. And a lot of friends across the street would do the standard
[Guest]: stuff. But it was an interesting time because, you know, I'd love music from the time I was
[Guest]: a kid. This is story my mother tells that I would dance to water splashing in the bathroom
[Guest]: and I was that kid I would go for breakdancing competitions from the time it was allowed
[Guest]: for me to go in terms of just an age limit. And you would go to an audio cassette shop
[Guest]: and all you would find was Michael Jackson, Michael Jackson and Madonna and a few others
[Guest]: or once in a while a Bruce Springsteen would pop in and that's pretty much what you had
[Guest]: available. And I watched a lot of the albums lecture and he was a huge influence at that
[Guest]: time for most of us. I think I saw his thriller version before I saw the actual thriller version
[Guest]: of Michael Jackson. So I grew up that way. But I feel it was it was an interesting mix
[Guest]: of things as my parents were people who were very exposed to the world outside. So you
[Guest]: know, at home, I would still have you'd have a Michael J. Fox movie playing on one end
[Guest]: or you'd have I remember there was a book. There was Khalil Gibran's book, which used
[Guest]: to be there or, you know, you'd find such varied things at home. And you wouldn't understand
[Guest]: when you suddenly left the house, you see a lot of people weren't necessarily into a
[Guest]: lot of that stuff. So my parents kind of balanced it. I think I learned to balance it as well.
[Guest]: And eventually you same for my sister as well many years later. But it was an interesting
[Guest]: time and they had a group of friends who I grew up with. And so this is a close group
[Guest]: I kind of grew along with. So yeah, I actually got a lot of my music influences from my parents,
[Guest]: what they would listen to, I would listen to they don't see there was a lot of Beatles
[Guest]: at home. There was a standard, you know, Deep Purple, Pink Floyd, etc. My uncle, my mom's
[Guest]: younger brother actually became an interesting influence for me because I had moved towards
[Guest]: listening to a lot of pop and stuff like that. Like he came home and he saw I think he saw
[Guest]: me listening to Backstreet Boys. And he was like this, there is no way you're going down
[Guest]: this route and gave me a Marilyn Manson and a Nine Inch Nails CD. My life changed after
[Guest]: that. Mother was not happy because I used to play Doom at that point of time and listen
[Guest]: to Marilyn Manson. And at that point of time in America, a lot of the school shootings
[Guest]: had had happened to people who are listening to this and playing that game, right? So and
[Guest]: I was like, you know, I know you're worried about it. That's not what I'm going to do.
[Guest]: And and so I feel a lot of and then my my journey with music's been interesting. It's
[Guest]: one of the things I obsessed over so much. I listened to so much music through every
[Guest]: single genre. So that was like a huge point, which is also kind of led me to being this
[Guest]: person obsessed with music television. Like I would only watch channel B and MTV in the
[Guest]: 90s. Before that, for people who remember it, every Saturday or Sunday, DD Metro would
[Guest]: have a compilation of music videos that would come. Top of the Pops, I think it was called
[Guest]: I don't remember the exact name. There was an interesting name to it. So I used to record
[Guest]: those on a tape and rewatch them. So Careless Whisper. I remember there were a bunch of
[Guest]: those videos at that point of time. Tracy Chapman. And I would say I used to love the
[Guest]: music video as an as a form. It was something which really appealed to me. And I always
[Guest]: the dream was that in life, I want to something with MTV in life. I didn't know what it was,
[Guest]: but I think that it originated there and eventually did happen years later. So one tick off the
[Guest]: box happened. But my influences are very varied in that sense. Like so I would be guilty boy
[Guest]: when you come out of the house, two buttons of the shirt kind of get loosened up, you
[Guest]: go hang with the boys, talk about Chiranjeevi, do all of that stuff. But when you're back
[Guest]: home, I can also get my own space to be myself. So it was an interesting time growing up.
[Amit Varma]: In that period, what's your comfort food like not just in terms of food, but are there songs
[Amit Varma]: you keep going back to other movies you keep going back to books you reread?
[Guest]: So I'm actually a hardcore massy Bollywood buff. Tridev is still one of my all time favorite
[Guest]: movies. I still go back to it when I need to find something to watch. And that's up
[Guest]: top, etc. were obviously always there. But I think Tridev is something I don't know why
[Guest]: I keep going back to it. Mithun movies, Dance Dance, Disco Dancer, that kind of cinema somehow
[Guest]: appealed to me and it still does. There was something so interesting about it that characters
[Guest]: right and for me what I used to enjoy about those were not the main guys. You'd have the
[Guest]: two guys around Amrish Puri or you'd have you know, those other characters for me was
[Guest]: so amazing. I miss them in movies now. So I do a lot of that though I go back to that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I still eat pickle with every single meal that I can. So pickle is my comfort food.
[Guest]: I through the pandemic because my mom couldn't ship me some I eventually found someone who
[Guest]: can ship it off Amazon and I got it. So food wise, I'm pretty straightforward. I enjoy
[Guest]: all kinds of food but I am eating by myself. You still old school, right? You'd have some
[Guest]: pickle if you're if you're guilty. And but yeah, so I still go back to some of those
[Guest]: things. I've also got a lot into science fiction at that point of time as well. So Austin Scott
[Guest]: Card was a huge influence in terms of his books, not necessarily his political views
[Guest]: later on, but as I as I learned, but he wrote a series called the Ender series, which kind
[Guest]: of really stuck with me, right. And what I loved about that is he wrote a series with
[Guest]: one character, and then he went back and he wrote the same story from the perspective
[Guest]: of different characters, which I found so interesting for an author to actually do in
[Guest]: science fiction and fantasy. So yeah, so varied influences, varied directions, as you can
[Amit Varma]: see.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fascinating. And you mentioned that your parents had you early, they were in their
[Amit Varma]: early 20s. And you know, just today in my writing group, someone shared one of my favorite
[Amit Varma]: poems by Philip Larkin, where the first verse effectively is, they F you up your mom and
[Amit Varma]: dad, they may not mean to, but they do, they fill you with the faults they had, and add
[Amit Varma]: some extra just for you. And then it kind of goes on. What were they like as parents?
[Amit Varma]: Were you a rebellious kid? What kind of kid were you? When you look back in hindsight,
[Amit Varma]: like now you're a parent yourself, and I'm presuming you became a parent a little later
[Amit Varma]: with a little more reflection and all of that. So what was it like growing up? Because in
[Amit Varma]: a sense, I think young parents when they have their first kid, they are growing up at the
[Amit Varma]: same time as a kid, which is, you know, kind of interesting and something that you might
[Amit Varma]: only see in hindsight. What was that like?
[Guest]: So I actually have a very interesting relationship with my parents, right? Because, like you
[Guest]: rightly said, we grew up together in many ways. They were learning things as at the
[Guest]: time when, you know, they were very young. But I think that what I had, in many ways
[Guest]: was we were very close knit unit, we were always together, we were doing stuff. I remember
[Guest]: when I did my kindergarten in Manipal, because my dad was doing his master's in surgery there.
[Guest]: And I spent a large amount of time there because me and my mom would generally just like, roll
[Guest]: around and do stuff. I mean, I didn't have school. And you'd explore places, you kind
[Guest]: of go somewhere and me and my mom on her on her. It was a Luna would kind of go around.
[Guest]: And I think that's what made it interesting for for I think, for all three of us, because
[Guest]: we kind of got, you know, I feel like you have a lot more moments when you're not watching
[Guest]: something or not doing something. And I feel we had a lot more moments. Nowadays, obviously,
[Guest]: which is what I still try to do as a parent now, I still retain that a lot more. And,
[Guest]: and eventually, when you kind of got back, obviously, everybody gets into their work
[Guest]: and everything else. But I but for me, those early years were very interesting. And whichever
[Guest]: part I recollect, because I feel that, you know, they were trying to get to a point of
[Guest]: actually doing something in life, while I was still trying to figure out what I mean,
[Guest]: you're in kindergarten, you don't know anything, right. So and I was a reasonably naughty kid,
[Guest]: I would not be. So, you know, they'd be having breakfast and get a call from call from school
[Guest]: that I've cut my tongue by jumping around with my tongue out. So I had to get surgery
[Guest]: on my tongue to stitch it up. Because my tongue was flopping out and I just done something
[Guest]: in or like fallen off a Luna somewhere and some stones gone into my knee. So I was, I
[Guest]: don't think I was troublesome, but I would get into trouble a lot. I've always been good
[Guest]: at avoiding being caught. It has been the long standing trend to a large part of my
[Guest]: schooling years is that I would be involved in the planning of things. I would be involved
[Guest]: in the execution of a prank or something to do, but most times would not get caught. And
[Guest]: I kind of see that trait in layer as well. So I at some point, I call her out on some
[Guest]: of those things. I like I know what you're doing. I've done that. So for the three and
[Guest]: a half year old, three and a half year old, she looks at me. So fair enough, you got me
[Guest]: there. But I think that it's all it was great fun growing up with with them being so young
[Guest]: as well because I because I got to see parties as I was growing up, I got to see them being
[Guest]: young. So those are my oldest remembrance recollections of both of them, which which
[Guest]: is great.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating. And what was it like growing up in a small town? Like how long were you
[Amit Varma]: there? And also I guess a small town can affect you in two ways. One is that it can give you
[Amit Varma]: a certain sense of confidence because back in the day, you don't really know the big
[Amit Varma]: bad world out there. So you know, you can be comfortable in your skin and all those
[Amit Varma]: other anxieties that might come in when you're in a big city when you feel you're being judged
[Amit Varma]: where all those other pressures aren't really there. But at the same time, what's your view
[Amit Varma]: of the world in the sense of view of the world, even given that, you know, you're in a home
[Amit Varma]: of some privilege, there's exposure to books and music and all of that, but even all of
[Amit Varma]: that is kind of limited. So what's your view of the world at that time? And when you look
[Amit Varma]: back on, you know, the small town, you, you know, what strikes you?
[Guest]: The interesting part is, there is an interesting flip, right? And you mentioned it in the right
[Guest]: way. When you're in a small town, and you do reasonably well at things, I was an I was
[Guest]: an average, sometimes above average student, right? I was not I was, you know, I was one
[Guest]: of those guys, you go to a PT meeting saying he can do he has so much potential, you know,
[Guest]: that kid, but I'd still be like house captain easily, I would win a swimming competition
[Guest]: because there were five kids who would swim. And so there was things where you in hindsight
[Guest]: to think about and you're like, so I would hustle my way into being every single sports
[Guest]: team very bad at sport in general. And so I don't think I was overconfident. But I did.
[Guest]: I wasn't confident with a certain sense of confidence that you know, I was among the
[Guest]: top set of people, right? Not necessarily studies, because obviously, and you know,
[Guest]: there's a huge issue with education and systems in general, because I feel they're built for
[Guest]: almost like a supply chain system of getting people out with the same sort of mindsets.
[Guest]: So I wasn't actually those guys would get like 95% 96%. And I ended up in my 10 standard
[Guest]: with like an 88%, which in hindsight is not bad. But it wasn't necessarily that you didn't
[Guest]: get above 90%. So a lot of people would be like that my parents didn't necessarily care
[Guest]: as much they were like, you know, 88 is good enough. And, and so but after that, when I
[Guest]: actually went to Bangalore, from 11th and 12th, and that actually was an interesting
[Guest]: story is that I actually joined junior college in in Kakinada. I took the standard or my
[Guest]: friends were joining a couple of those colleges to study to become engineers. I said, Okay,
[Guest]: I don't want to be a doctor. My logic was it takes x number of years to study to be
[Guest]: an engineer x number of years to be a doctor. Engineering is much lower. Let's do that.
[Guest]: I also still love to code coding was a love of mine because I discovered computers and
[Guest]: I still remember that first dial up modem that came in trying to open that website at
[Guest]: night. Opening a website at night was for obvious reasons because you could also discover
[Guest]: things which are not allowed to watch when parents were awake. And so I was I was obsessed
[Guest]: with that. So I learned like, you know, early programming language like basic and, and c
[Guest]: plus plus and stuff like that. And, and I saw a lot of that. And I joined this college,
[Guest]: which is supposed to prepare you for engineering entrance and all that stuff. And the culture
[Guest]: shop we weirdly enough, even though I was in school in Kakinada was immense, because
[Guest]: it was a factory outlet to create people who would get into engineering college. And it
[Guest]: would almost be a scenario where you'd be in college from seven in the morning till
[Guest]: like seven at night, you are pushed to study Sanskrit as your language because Sanskrit
[Guest]: you can actually get almost 100 out of 100. Because all the questions come from the textbook.
[Guest]: So it was almost you're mugging up the entire textbook. So you could actually get that you
[Guest]: need to get a higher percentile. And there's a reason why I feel that we have a factory
[Guest]: outlet of engineers coming because we're not necessarily bringing out creative engineers
[Guest]: that I really related to. I know everyone talks about three idiots. But when I saw that
[Guest]: and I and I saw, I think Chichori, right, which is a Sushant one, I related to those
[Guest]: more from those times, as much as it were engineering years, because that is the truth.
[Guest]: That is what happens. And, and my uncle had come down to get a procedure done. One of
[Guest]: my dad's friends had come down to get a procedure done with my dad. And he's like, what are
[Guest]: you doing here? And I'm like, I'm doing this. It's like you, you are a person who should
[Guest]: not be here. And he said, let me take you to my school. And he was from a school called
[Guest]: Bishop Hortons in Bangalore, boarding school, been around for years and years and years
[Guest]: and some amount of heritage, etc. So it took me there somehow managed to get me so me my
[Guest]: dad and him drove down, sat there, dad, and he figured out how to get me admission. I
[Guest]: don't know what they did. They got me in. Because term had started been a few weeks.
[Guest]: But he was an ex student and he kind of pulled a few pieces there. But once I got in and
[Guest]: I had to go to a hostel, very nice boarding school. The flip that happened in my life
[Guest]: is whatever I perceived as cool, whatever I perceived as a confidence building thing
[Guest]: for me back in Kakinada suddenly became a big negative for me. Because you would watch
[Guest]: a movie, let's say I watch Kuch Kuch Hota Hai and this is a fact. And you find him wearing
[Guest]: a neon color t shirt, you would buy a neon color t shirt. I had that cool chain that
[Guest]: Shahrukh wore, right, which is not cool at all in hindsight to wear and I was told it
[Guest]: was not cool. So I believe those two years in boarding school, although I made some great
[Guest]: friends, some of them are still kind of chat with them on a, we all reunited on a WhatsApp
[Guest]: group recently, which is fun. I feel those couple of years really pushed me down in terms
[Guest]: of just generally what my confidence level was. So I retreated and I was this kid who
[Guest]: would get on the stage to do anything would do it. And I finally become this guy who was
[Guest]: very averse to, I wanted to prove that I was cool. So I would do stuff like bunking out
[Guest]: at night or go out and get biryani for the entire dorm because and not like I was paying
[Guest]: for it. I would be the guy who do those things just to almost get some sort of approval.
[Guest]: And I feel a lot of people go through that. So years later, when I was asked to do my
[Guest]: first TEDx talk, and it was in the engineering college in Kakinada, what actually spoke about
[Guest]: was a small town mindset. And I spoke about that because I believe a lot of guys go through
[Guest]: that. A lot of people come from a small town with an immense chip on their shoulder, that
[Guest]: I'm somehow less aware, no lesser, I'm not where all these other guys are in everything,
[Guest]: apart from maybe marks. And I did that primarily because I felt that through my years in Bangalore,
[Guest]: my parents called those the dark ages of, of my time, I had a lot of fun. I have a lot
[Guest]: of friends from my Bangalore time, but it was not the nicest time in my own headspace
[Amit Varma]: in where I was.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And that's like a fascinating transition you spoke about, about how you sort of land
[Amit Varma]: up in Bishop's Cotton in Bangalore and all these other imperatives come into play where
[Amit Varma]: what was once cool is not cool. So you got to prove you're cool. And you're, you know,
[Amit Varma]: signaling in different ways. And that reminded me of something Jonathan Haidt recently said,
[Amit Varma]: like I produce a podcast called Brave New World, which is hosted by Vasanthar. And he
[Amit Varma]: did an episode with Jonathan Haidt, where he was talking about what social media has
[Amit Varma]: done over the last 10 years, essentially. And apparently, for boys, it's not been a
[Amit Varma]: problem because they spend a lot of time playing video games and all of that. And it builds
[Amit Varma]: up skills and it doesn't really hurt them. For girls, it's been devastating and has led
[Amit Varma]: to a rise in teenage depression and all of that. And I think what girls go through seems
[Amit Varma]: to be similar to what you said you went through in the sense that you are suddenly on this
[Amit Varma]: platform where everyone is performing all the time. You know, all the other nine year
[Amit Varma]: old girls, if you're a nine year old girl, are brand managers of themselves, where they're
[Amit Varma]: putting a particular face forward. And if you want to belong, that's what you do. And
[Amit Varma]: back in the day before social media, maybe you hang out in person together and you build
[Amit Varma]: bonds that way. But over here, everything is performative. There are all these anxieties
[Amit Varma]: and pressures and at a larger societal level, you know, it seems to me just sinking allowed
[Amit Varma]: to be an analogue of what you went through when you, you know, went from a small town
[Amit Varma]: into the big bad world. And that seems to be happening to kids everywhere all the time.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, is that something that's kind of struck you as well?
[Guest]: Yeah, definitely has it because this need for acceptance is so high. And you're also
[Guest]: different kinds. And I feel that that says, I knew there were people in my batch, if I
[Guest]: go back to boarding school, who didn't necessarily care, you know, there would be one set of
[Guest]: people who were generally the guys who just came in to study, stay in the dorm, go do
[Guest]: what they want to do. Then there were the cool kids, right? There were some of them
[Guest]: who've been around boarding for a long time. Some of them who were good at sport, or, you
[Guest]: know, the guys who became became prefects or had, you know, all those things. I became
[Guest]: a prefect at some point, also stripped off it for a reason, which I'll get into. And
[Guest]: so they were all of those. And at some point, you want to be friends with the cool ones.
[Guest]: And I mean, I don't think there's anything wrong about what you have your regular stuff
[Guest]: that happens. And it is a little bit of pulling of the leg and stuff. But I feel that for
[Guest]: some people who kind of stuck in between, which is what I was, I didn't want to be the
[Guest]: person who was not hanging around with with everyone. But I knew I wasn't cool enough,
[Guest]: because I didn't play football, my taste in music at that point, while I still had a few
[Guest]: of these Meryl Manson's and Nine Inch Nails and stuff like that, I was still also did
[Guest]: have a Backstreet Boys CD, because I still like to listen to Backstreet Boys. So, oh,
[Guest]: you don't listen to Guns and Roses happened, or you know, I discovered Weezer and I discovered
[Guest]: Green Day. And so people had progressed beyond some of the stuff I listened to, because I
[Guest]: didn't have access to them. And so that became a thing. And you slowly make friends. But
[Guest]: I feel that boarding school more than anything else, which I don't think it's it's going
[Guest]: to be the same now because of cell phones and everything else. Boarding school taught
[Guest]: you that you'd meet so many different characters from across the world. It's almost like a
[Guest]: mini social network where you kind of put into and you don't know what anyone's thinking,
[Guest]: because I don't think anyone's coming in with bad intentions. Everyone has their own thought
[Guest]: processes and you learn how to navigate life a lot more. And I learned a lot of that in
[Guest]: two years. And but in trying to do that, you would do stuff like you know, jump off the
[Guest]: gate and go and watch Phir Bhi Dil Hai Hindustani of all movies and get caught, get stripped
[Guest]: off your prefect ship, kicked out of boarding, live in a friend's house, take money from
[Guest]: home and not necessarily spend it right and use it more for partying and other things
[Guest]: and not spend it on food. And I remember that there was a time when I told my mother and
[Guest]: she I knew that she was really upset about it, that I was spending change to eat bananas
[Guest]: as food, but spending all the money on going out to party and have a drink and all that
[Guest]: stuff, right. And in hindsight, really stupid things, but I feel doing stupid things in
[Guest]: life teach you later on. And, and I think I've learned a lot from from especially those
[Amit Varma]: years when I look back at those.
[Amit Varma]: And it also kind of strikes me and I'm thinking aloud that in certain ways, you know, ambition
[Amit Varma]: can be a drawback, in the sense that you spoke about kids in your boarding school who are
[Amit Varma]: not ambitious in a sense of needing to fit in. So they can just chill out, they can study,
[Amit Varma]: they can do whatever they can listen to Backstreet Boys. But if you're ambitious, and you want
[Amit Varma]: to get ahead in the world, and you want to fit in, then you start kind of doing things
[Amit Varma]: to fit in. And it can especially be a con and strikes me in the modern world where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we grew up where our early thoughts are not captured for posterity, right? Because
[Amit Varma]: there's no Twitter, there's no Facebook, we are not the kind of garbage that we thought
[Amit Varma]: and said, like, I know, I thought and said, I'm sure you must have as well, because young
[Amit Varma]: people do, right? And it's not out there. Nobody's, you know, taking a screenshot, putting
[Amit Varma]: it out there. And with young people, it seems to me that there is this pressure to be performative
[Amit Varma]: to kind of enter that race. And once you have, it can harden who you are. Because I think
[Amit Varma]: what happens is that, you know, if I have a bunch of private thoughts, and I don't articulate
[Amit Varma]: them, it's that much more likely for me to change my mind to learn as things go on. But
[Amit Varma]: once I take public positions, then because of reasons of ego, I can feel compelled to
[Amit Varma]: double down and defend the positions I have taken. And then I can harden and that alone
[Amit Varma]: can just make me a completely different person from what I, you know, otherwise would have
[Amit Varma]: been. And again, I'm just thinking aloud. But do you think there's something to that?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, how much of sort of happenstance do you ascribe to your becoming the person
[Amit Varma]: you are? Because, you know, all these little things that happen in our lives can just shape
[Amit Varma]: us and take us in directions which changes completely. For example, what if you hadn't
[Amit Varma]: gone to Bishop Cotton School? What if you'd stayed in your engineering factory in Kokkinada?
[Amit Varma]: Or what if you know the directions that we'll discuss that you took after this, where you
[Amit Varma]: got into communication and all that and shifted from that path? What if all that hadn't sort
[Guest]: of happened?
[Guest]: I totally agree. I think that there are moments in your life which define who you become.
[Guest]: One moment for me was definitely coming. And because also, it was weird that my parents
[Guest]: actually sent me because when I was in my fourth standard, they took me to another boarding
[Guest]: school in Ooty and I came back in three days. I literally went with my dad and came back
[Guest]: with my dad saying I don't want to do this. Basically cried and came back. But that would
[Guest]: be one strong moment. I feel another moment to be right after my 12th standard around
[Guest]: that time. Now here's where I think some things were just meant to be right. Everybody's supposed
[Guest]: to write for IIT. I don't think there's any chance I would have gotten into IIT. IIT pre-exams
[Guest]: were on 2nd of Jan 2000. Now for anybody, I'm just trying to think of the person who
[Guest]: decided that would be the day for an IIT exam to happen. It is the millennium. It is. It
[Guest]: is a day after New Year's Eve. And I knew so many people who were sitting and studying.
[Guest]: I didn't. I didn't. I literally I didn't even give the exam. And I remember telling my parents
[Guest]: I that I'm I'm going to but I just didn't. And that was I was anyway on a downward spiral
[Guest]: in life. And then that led me to not preparing properly for engineering intense exams. Didn't
[Guest]: get into it. Then you start escaping the reality that you are on a downward spiral. And I went
[Guest]: on that route for a long time. Because what happens is that you start. I feel the difference
[Guest]: is that at that point in time, you would hide stuff for fear of what your parents or what
[Guest]: society would think. But you would hide lesser things. So a lot of stuff you would do was
[Guest]: not entirely documented online, like you said. But I think the realm of what all you hide
[Guest]: like, I know that sometimes I kind of go back to some old posts on Instagram or on Facebook
[Guest]: and think, okay, was there stuff I would see in the past because I didn't know it was kosher
[Guest]: or not. And I agree. There were terms we use, there were jokes we made, there was gentle
[Guest]: behavior trends, because I don't think people I think there are two kinds, you either don't
[Guest]: know any better because everybody else is doing it. Or you know it and you willfully
[Guest]: do it. And I feel a vast majority, even maybe even now, don't know any better. They don't
[Guest]: understand the concept of many other things and why something is wrong. And I feel that
[Guest]: was obviously much larger than, but it's not like it's gone away even now. I still meet
[Guest]: many people who don't understand. I remember meeting someone in Bombay when, when the MeToo
[Guest]: movement was happening and he was like, does MeToo exist? Because I don't think he, I think
[Guest]: he was oblivious of it. I don't think he really meant it as to say, okay, do these things
[Guest]: really happen? I think he really meant it in terms of, is it actually such a big thing
[Guest]: that you know, it hasn't, you know, more than disbelief, it was more like, really, is it
[Guest]: such a big thing? So, and I found that interesting. And I take those parallels back in life through
[Guest]: many things, right? And, and, and you would look at even something as small as what it
[Guest]: meant to kind of get into a place on merit, which I never knew. I'd gotten into bishops
[Guest]: through my uncle. I eventually got into engineering college again, through another dad's friend,
[Guest]: because management quota had to happen. So he figured a college, which was good in Bangalore
[Guest]: management quota, dad upset to pay money, got in. And that was again, one more downward
[Guest]: spiral in life, right? Didn't do well, kept flunking papers, managed to escape through
[Guest]: a four-year degree in six years. But, but yeah, so I feel that that period, I look back
[Guest]: at a lot, many times, sometimes, especially when I write something down, whenever I try
[Guest]: to write a book, I always go back to those years. Because I feel like in hindsight, I
[Guest]: learned so much from those years than I did at that point of time.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in one of the earlier episodes of advertising is dead, in fact, the most
[Amit Varma]: charming episode in my little opinion, you know, the Valentine's episode where your wife
[Amit Varma]: sort of chats with you, Pooja. And at one point, she, I think, uses phrase about you,
[Amit Varma]: which I found fascinating, which is she said that you're in a quote, deep relationship
[Amit Varma]: with yourself, stop quote. And I was kind of struck by that. And, you know, I've been
[Amit Varma]: sort of thinking about how we construct our sense of the self in recent years. And it
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that it is all so contingent in the sense that we are hardwired in a certain
[Amit Varma]: way. And that's an accident. And then we are born where we are in the circumstances and
[Amit Varma]: families. And that's also an accident. And then we go through life and all these different
[Amit Varma]: accidents happen to us. And in the end, we end up as you know, whoever we are at that
[Amit Varma]: point in time, which is to me, it seems almost entirely a product of accidents. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, for someone given to this, you know, the kind of self reflection you've done in
[Amit Varma]: your podcast and in your newsletter and all of that, what do you think of that? Like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, do you think that if there is like, who is Varun really? Like, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: easy to say that, okay, we are a product of all these different things happening to us.
[Amit Varma]: But let's say that other things happen. Is there a constant Varun who is at the center
[Amit Varma]: of it all through this or do circumstances changing change you? Does a chemical imbalance
[Amit Varma]: in your head which you know, a different set of things happen? Does that change you? You
[Amit Varma]: know, there are people who will get a brain tumor and they'll go and do mass shootings
[Amit Varma]: because something has changed in a subtle way. So is there a core Varun in there? Or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like me, do you also sometimes feel that you're kind of floating that you know,
[Guest]: who am I sort of? The floating happens all the time. But there is something I've realized,
[Guest]: especially in a weird way. After I started the podcast, right? I've always tried to play
[Guest]: the role which I felt I needed to post my Bangalore years because you know, I went through
[Guest]: the engineering phase didn't get didn't even apply for a job in engineering because I didn't
[Guest]: want to do it did that whole, did a call center stint where I worked for AOL cancellations
[Guest]: for about I think it feels like a year but I think it was four to six months and work
[Guest]: for Jack Daniels whiskey and a few others as a alcohol promoter. When I went to Pune,
[Guest]: I took a call for myself because and I feel that's which adds back to everything which
[Guest]: I am at this moment is that when I got into symbiosis in Pune, I'd actually gotten through
[Guest]: merit and I got into merit also through a bit of a fluke. So that's one more crucial
[Guest]: point in my life is my mother's was I don't know if she still is, but I should ask her
[Guest]: was a reader's digest reader for the longest subscriber. I'd always have that at home and
[Guest]: my mom would always be reading it. The symbiosis entrance piece application from came in a
[Guest]: reader's edition, sends it to me in Bangalore while I was working in the call center said
[Guest]: you always want to work in the media. Why don't you just apply and because I was doing
[Guest]: the job of a promoter as well. I'd applied to it saying I want to study PR was about
[Guest]: the same thing. I didn't know any better quit my job went back home didn't study just like
[Guest]: lied around on the couch and watched MTV for those few months. And then when I went back
[Guest]: to Bangalore, give that exam. I actually I remember I went back to Bangalore got a haircut
[Guest]: met a friend after a long time had drank all night and and went for the exam in the morning
[Guest]: answered English answered general knowledge and walked out didn't answer start didn't
[Guest]: answer math none of those things because in my head I was like if it's for mass comm
[Guest]: why do they need these sections it was common for a lot of you know this is a random point
[Guest]: I don't I was still not serious in life but I still had a job and I was still figuring
[Guest]: it out. So and I got in I got in the first list I remember when I got in the first list
[Guest]: I didn't believe it I didn't even check someone checked and called me and I cut the call because
[Guest]: I was asleep at two in the afternoon and and I think at that point I'm like this is finally
[Guest]: you're getting a chance in life to prove something through merit something you always wanted
[Guest]: to do. So when I went to Pune I said it's not like I will suddenly become this saint.
[Guest]: But if I don't focus now, there is no point. And so I became this person who knew I had
[Guest]: a role to play and my role was okay during this time I need to learn as much as I can
[Guest]: about this space that I've always been so fascinated by that I can get a career here.
[Guest]: Where do you want to work channel be MTV literally two places I wanted to work went to internet
[Guest]: MTV did all of that through my reality show period focused on being a producer. That's
[Guest]: what I wanted to be through the period of glitch. It was about being the right kind
[Guest]: of I don't think entrepreneur but just being that person who was around to make sure enough
[Guest]: support was there. The podcast actually let me suddenly be myself again after a long time
[Guest]: out in the open, which I never was I'd still hold back that I was a guy even at least would
[Guest]: not go out and have a lot of like events kind of going out for a drink. I would not go beyond
[Guest]: the first drink and I would leave because I'm like I will not I still have to have that
[Guest]: relationship where you can turn to me when you need something. Not someone who's always
[Guest]: hanging out even though I might want to some of the early guys was who I crossed that with
[Guest]: very early on and but with the podcast I realized that now I'm so open about I'm like an open
[Guest]: book I talk about everything in my life people like why you so open about things I'm like
[Guest]: I finally have come to a point in life where I'm like all the stuff I've been interested
[Guest]: in all the stuff I have I like to do even though it some of them might be really weird.
[Guest]: It's fine. That's what makes me who I am. And the more I speak about it with that tone.
[Guest]: If there is a young kid from another small town listening to me in a small way, and I
[Guest]: feel like I want to give back to that kid that I was who was a lot of fun when he was
[Guest]: growing up in Kakinada had a lot of confidence of all the stuff that he was interested in.
[Guest]: Like I was a kid would jump off a stool for a breakdancing competition and jump onto stage
[Guest]: and try and do a Prabhudeva move. Right. And I went from that to being a person who was
[Guest]: just very happy to be at the back and not really be in the forefront of things and and
[Guest]: so I agree that what we are as kids is the purest form of what we are. But I feel at
[Guest]: some point when you when you reach a certain point in life to kind of go back to that if
[Guest]: you're lucky and get to have a slightly more mature version of that kid.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of fascinating and I like last week I did an episode with Prem Panikkar and who
[Amit Varma]: you know had a turbulent childhood turbulent sort of early adulthood and you know nothing
[Amit Varma]: was working out for him and then at one point he says that he finally got a job in Bombay
[Amit Varma]: in the Free Press Journal and he went out there and when he was given the job he was
[Amit Varma]: shown his desk and said okay this is where you'll be sitting and he said that was a turning
[Amit Varma]: point in his life because he sits down and then he goes to the loo and he throws up because
[Amit Varma]: he realizes that you know for the first time in his life that you know everything that
[Amit Varma]: he's ever spoken about he can do it now. Now is the time for him to actually act and get
[Amit Varma]: stuff done and you know when you were sort of speaking about that shift to symbiosis
[Amit Varma]: like earlier in your episode with Pooja you spoke about how you were always blaming others
[Amit Varma]: for everything that went wrong you know including those unfortunate choices of school or engineering
[Amit Varma]: or whatever and now you couldn't blame yourself anymore you had to kind of take charge and
[Amit Varma]: another thing that struck me about that episode was how you know your wife mentioned that
[Amit Varma]: your symbiosis friends remember you very differently from your Bangalore friends you know they
[Amit Varma]: remember you as much more driven and focused and all of that. Now when you came into it
[Amit Varma]: obviously like you said you weren't even sure what PR was early on you shifted into you
[Amit Varma]: know video production I think you said. What was that formative period like because you
[Amit Varma]: are discovering the media now it's also the early 2000s where the media is kind of changing
[Amit Varma]: shape and just becoming a whole different demon like I think when you know when I was
[Amit Varma]: on your show we spoke about how I was an MTV and Channel V from 95 to 99 and you made the
[Amit Varma]: same journey 10 years later and yet it struck me later that the organizations that we worked
[Amit Varma]: in at that time were completely different from each other and indeed they are completely
[Amit Varma]: different now from when you left it. So everything is evolving everything is changing and you
[Amit Varma]: are in this place where I presume some of the teaching must be teaching about an old
[Amit Varma]: paradigm an old world which is actual so you know a lot of it is just not going to be relevant
[Amit Varma]: you have to figure stuff out so take me through your process of kind of you know discovering
[Amit Varma]: what is the kind of work that you want to do and you know and how your image of yourself
[Amit Varma]: therefore evolves like at that point in time what do you see yourself becoming. So if I
[Guest]: look at my symbiosis time it wasn't as much about what I was taught to be honest I still
[Guest]: wasn't focused in studies that I would still like if you had a 8 a.m. and 3d animation
[Guest]: class I would not show up because I would not be awake at 8 a.m. but there were few
[Guest]: modules that really spoke to me and interesting enough so I remember my editing teacher right
[Guest]: he would show us Amar Akbar Anthony and he would talk to us about certain shorts and
[Guest]: how they were edited and he was this fascinating man and Yogesh Mathur I think his name was
[Guest]: and he'd come in from FTI and he would talk about these things and I was never so I'm
[Guest]: not a purist in that sense I won't talk about film the way people do and digital versus
[Guest]: film and none of those things right I'm a product of the 90s MTV I keep going back to
[Guest]: that for me having being able to have worked with Chinnappa and Cyrus and all these guys
[Guest]: was like a dream because I'd kind of for me the benchmark of someone who was really held
[Guest]: that spot for me has been Nikhil Chinnappa right by far like the range that man is shown
[Guest]: still continues to show in fact he's still there still relevant is phenomenal and I look
[Guest]: and so when I was there I think I made a great set of friends and we all interestingly had
[Guest]: similar interests deep down I feel a lot of my friends I still have from Bangalore great
[Guest]: guys I can hang with them we'll have a lot of fun but I think deep down what we were
[Guest]: really interested in what we could talk about for days and hours was not necessarily the
[Guest]: same thing and I think that's really the big difference and secondly when you're in a communication
[Guest]: school no matter how much structure they might want to put around you it still is a lot more
[Guest]: open-ended you'd have an art class and you would have a class around editing and and
[Guest]: I was terrible at cameras I will not say camera and a bunch of those and and I feel that gave
[Guest]: me a certain level of freedom and also because we all were living off campus Pune was an
[Guest]: interesting space at that point of time for us because we weren't in the huge campus that
[Guest]: the Simbi kids are now and right we were in this small campus and we had like four rooms
[Guest]: and we all live around campus somewhere so I feel that period for me was great because
[Guest]: of the friends I made and because of the conversations I had with some of my professors some of them
[Guest]: who were from an old time right so when I went to intern and came back me and Rohit
[Guest]: had you know my co-founder we'd used cameras like it was something we would we could rough
[Guest]: rough around with but back in college for a lot of those professors a camera was I remember
[Guest]: professor said camera tumhari maa hoti hai roti usse milta hai is the actual thing that
[Guest]: was said right because we were even playing around with the camera I said why can't I
[Guest]: just throw it off a thing I'll pad it up so I can get that drop down shot of something
[Guest]: falling and I saw the shock on on my professor's face that I would even think of something
[Guest]: like that but I'm like it's okay it's a handicap and we'll throw it off when he like really
[Guest]: had a bit of a fit I remember but more than anything else I feel you need to be around
[Guest]: the right set of people at the right time in life I feel at every single point like
[Guest]: I would not have been as reasonably fluent in Hindi if it was not for my friends during
[Guest]: engineering college who were all Punjabi I learned Hindi from them because till then
[Guest]: school Hindi is not Hindi you do not say hai at the end of every sentence I have never
[Guest]: understood why that is written that way I learned it from a group of Punjabi boys almost
[Guest]: all of whose weddings I've danced at and and who I meet whenever I can when they're here
[Guest]: or whenever I've been able to travel and what is fun about the bunch who I met in simpies
[Guest]: those are guys I still hang with even now they are still my closest friends they're
[Guest]: still the people I can truly be no holds barred hang the same baby I've hung since 2005-06
[Amit Varma]: I think and what was sort of you know during this period where you're learning the craft
[Amit Varma]: of different things whether it's editing and you said not so much camera but you're learning
[Amit Varma]: the craft of different things what is the kind of art that appeals to you like what
[Amit Varma]: are your influences who are your idols like of course you've said that there's an attraction
[Amit Varma]: towards MTV and channel V though by this time they had actually changed a lot because I
[Amit Varma]: remember you know when I went to channel V shortly after quick gun morugan happened and
[Amit Varma]: all of that because I was sort of attracted to that I was there for a couple of years
[Amit Varma]: and I went to MTV and you know your ex-boss Cyrus Oshidar joined a bit after that who
[Amit Varma]: you've you know mentioned in other conversations and I still remember there was one drastic
[Amit Varma]: day where you know at that point in time ours early CEO before Alex came in was a guy called
[Amit Varma]: Sunil Lulla who I remember when he first interviewed me he was wearing shorts and green socks which
[Amit Varma]: I thought is so cool this is what MTV should be and he would always say that we will only
[Amit Varma]: play western music we are not going to do Hindi we're not going to do this and then
[Amit Varma]: there was this regional meeting one day where you know there was I think whoever was charge
[Amit Varma]: of MTV Asia came down and he's like standing in the middle and the entire office is there
[Amit Varma]: and that guy stands there and you know reels of the figures that this is how much Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: sells this is how much Hindi sells I don't understand why we are not playing that music
[Amit Varma]: and Sunil is of course nodding vigorously and we went Hindi with a vengeance and that
[Amit Varma]: was a first shift I saw and it was still okay and I came in from this very sort of snobbish
[Amit Varma]: and elitist position of no no you know I came here because you know I love alternative rock
[Amit Varma]: and you know I'd be talking about all those great shows in the MTV US and you know I was
[Amit Varma]: devastated when they dropped Beavis and Butthead you know when I joined MTV it was playing
[Amit Varma]: and they dropped it and and I thought that's a horrible shift but then what I saw in the
[Amit Varma]: 2000s was that the shift was you know they just went into reality TV and roadies and
[Amit Varma]: all of that which you know not my thing at all and then they went I mean it just seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that they progressively went further and further away from what I like them for
[Amit Varma]: in the first place but that's a digression what I was asking was what were you looking
[Amit Varma]: up to then like you're learning the craft what kind of work do you want to do like do
[Amit Varma]: you want to make movies at some point you want to make music videos at some point what
[Amit Varma]: are the music videos that you really like from that period so weirdly enough I wanted
[Guest]: to just make music videos I thought that's what people in music channels did that we
[Guest]: would make music videos you in hindsight you find out that's not true at all so I went
[Guest]: through phases I think for me some of the typical ones that you would listen to Nirvana
[Guest]: very into Kurt Cobain and Jim Morrison so when he said how was I in college I at some
[Guest]: point became that pretentious okay and now I'm in a communication school person it's
[Guest]: okay in college we're all pretentious so I think that's that's not necessarily a negative
[Guest]: point so I had grown my hair out a little bit I would have a jola on the side I would
[Guest]: I would listen to Jim Morrison at night after having had a couple of extra drinks shoot
[Guest]: my own shadow in the dark with some light on it and edit something weird with my own
[Guest]: poetry which is horrendous because and it wasn't like I was not warned I remember telling
[Guest]: me that I was influenced by the world's worst poet was Jim Morrison because I used to read
[Guest]: Jim Morrison's poetry books and try to write poetry like him not the best frame of reference
[Guest]: in hindsight but that was my frame of reference and that is my influence so I would write
[Guest]: these poems and I would dance in this thing and I would show it in college to some professors
[Guest]: who were also a little warped and they would try to find meaning in what I was shooting
[Guest]: and I was just a drunk guy who should be shadow and and it was a lot of fun I enjoy so I remember
[Guest]: that I submitted a lot of music videos as projects during that time except for my final
[Guest]: project and love shooting that kind of stuff because anything was orbit I would try stuff
[Guest]: out like but I also realized that I was always bit of a I think a Jew guard is the right
[Guest]: word so you would end up shooting a lot of stuff and you realize you don't have enough
[Guest]: footage so you suddenly start reversing the footage to cover up for it and make that seem
[Guest]: cool so I do a lot of those I should love to edit to edit was the edit room or something
[Guest]: which I fell in love with very early on because I could well that's where stuff really gets
[Guest]: made I actually went to MTV at an interesting time as well at my internship I remember was
[Guest]: in MTV and I said okay I'm going here I managed to get into the place I've always wanted to
[Guest]: get into and that office was phenomenal it's that huge space they had the vibe of it it
[Guest]: was just more than I ever expected it to be I remember we walk in the first day and you
[Guest]: see brocha sitting there and brocha's doing what brocha does in life which is just generally
[Guest]: being he was being a he wasn't an element of being a prankster in those days so he was
[Guest]: doing that because you'd pull off buckra's on every new person who joined MTV at that
[Guest]: point of time and he was pulling that off on someone so I happened to notice it and
[Guest]: one of my first shoots was with Nick Hill so all that is happening right I did research
[Guest]: for roadies but my thing was that okay I'm gone here let me learn as much as I can so
[Guest]: I worked on every single show that was possible so that influenced me a lot because I learned
[Guest]: the I learned the art of formats at MTV I actually learned how stuff has to be short
[Guest]: how you can because we were doing a lot with very little and we were using time like nobody
[Guest]: else was and I realized that only MTV did that channel we never did that because when
[Guest]: I later on went to channel B how much ever time it would take me to do three edits would
[Guest]: take someone people would do just one in that because MTV had taught me to work a certain
[Guest]: way that taught me a certain work ethic and and almost a structure of working which just
[Guest]: I feel that whatever we have as internet culture now is still for me stuff we did in MTV and
[Guest]: channel B right I can take every single format there is a connection there and I feel and
[Guest]: I'm a huge format junkie I love to explore different formats of just not everything like
[Guest]: even how people write a newsletter to how someone makes a YouTube video to to an Instagram
[Guest]: reel I look at formats like a hawk it's one of those things I love to see because I think
[Guest]: it shows variation and gives you something to kind of use as a framework and I kind of
[Guest]: brought that back so after my first year when I first year was generally chill I was learning
[Guest]: the ropes and stuff but I feel I came back to college in my second year after that three
[Guest]: four months stint at MTV having learned so much in that period and that's when I was
[Guest]: clear about what I wanted to do I knew I could be someone who worked in that kind of television
[Guest]: like youth television and reality TV was weirdly enough something I really enjoyed I gravitated
[Guest]: towards it because and I think at that time reality was a little different than what it
[Guest]: became eventually which is when I kind of tuned out of television reality then was saying
[Guest]: can you take a set of people and put them in a situation that will make them react with
[Guest]: some sort of emotion right so in my head is actually if you go deep into it's almost like
[Guest]: you're looking at human psychology right what will make someone because you are under pressure
[Guest]: you have cameras on you and you need to find a way to kind of push someone a little over
[Guest]: that edge to be able to react in the way they would naturally would if they were under pressure
[Guest]: but you just have to bring that in faster so and we would sit and do those things I
[Guest]: remember the first time I made someone cry on camera I felt I was really upset and I
[Guest]: would sit and I was and I remember Raghu came up to me and he sat down with me because he
[Guest]: saw I was upset about it and and he kind of sat with me and he spoke to me about the mindset
[Guest]: you need to have and the fact that you're not forcing someone to do this they've signed
[Guest]: up to be on a show you're doing what you have to do you're not in any way causing them harm
[Guest]: this is the pressure of it and and so I had a bunch of really good mentors at that point
[Guest]: I mean there were a bunch of producers the entire roadies bunch I remember Nikhil was
[Guest]: a person I would turn to I still turn to sometimes uh what speak to about how he did all the
[Guest]: stuff he did and I feel for me those four months and the stint I had after that when
[Guest]: I went back to MTV that was my true university in everything I've done in my career how to
[Guest]: manage teams how to organize stuff logistics I've learned it in that year and a half and
[Amit Varma]: you know a lot of things to kind of unpack there firstly you know I love reality television
[Amit Varma]: as well but as you know one of the early years of Twitter I think I was live tweeting Big
[Amit Varma]: Boss which I kind of liked much more than roadies to be frank which I thought was you
[Amit Varma]: know kind of obnoxious and difficult to watch but that's just me but one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: struck me when you were talking about your early forays into Jim Morrison's poetry and
[Amit Varma]: all of that is that typically when we are young and especially when we try to create
[Amit Varma]: things and of course it is a fact that in men the prefrontal cortex which is responsible
[Amit Varma]: for socializing and all that doesn't really you know develop till 25 so which is why a
[Amit Varma]: lot of teenage violence and all that is kind of common so so people take time to get formed
[Amit Varma]: and when you're young often you have energy but you don't necessarily have either taste
[Amit Varma]: or experience and experience of course comes with time and taste also forms and I think
[Amit Varma]: part of taste forming is of course you want to fit in with your peers so you listen to
[Amit Varma]: whatever they're doing but through all that there is kind of a core of your own taste
[Amit Varma]: to your own aesthetic your own sensibility kind of forming so you know couple of things
[Amit Varma]: like one clearly from a lot of your work like your newsletter especially recently focuses
[Amit Varma]: on things like frameworks and processes and all of that as you mentioned and that's a
[Amit Varma]: craft of it and that's also incredibly fascinating but before we get there tell me a bit about
[Amit Varma]: how your taste evolved during this period like out of you know what are your guilty
[Amit Varma]: pleasures still out of what you used to like then what makes you cringe today and you know
[Amit Varma]: what parts of your early work do you look back to when you say hey that's great and
[Guest]: what part is you know not quite like that so I actually look back on a large part of
[Guest]: that work and really was sometimes fascinated about the stuff which we did so I did all
[Guest]: my reality TV stuff I actually really enjoyed maybe my last show and channel which I can
[Guest]: get into was because the format was so bizarre and in hindsight I'm like I don't even know
[Guest]: what we were doing and it was a show called channel we kidnap where you would have a couple
[Guest]: and you would kidnap one of them and then you would make the person who's left behind
[Guest]: and this person's best friend compete in a series of tasks to win money and free the
[Guest]: person who's been kidnapped in hindsight when I'm saying this out loud it makes no sense
[Guest]: we made that show we made a really like interesting show but but what I think that was us really
[Guest]: just enjoying a format because of the stuff we could do right so we would give them tasks
[Guest]: and each of the episode there were three producers and all of us would have one one episode each
[Guest]: and so we were all reliving our fantasies of stuff we wanted to do as tasks I think
[Guest]: we had come to that point in reality TV where producers were just thinking of the tasks
[Guest]: and the masala you can get like I would come up with stuff where like I put an entire basement
[Guest]: on fire and this person's outside with locked up and the keys are inside and these guys
[Guest]: are going with heat suits and getting the chavis out with fireballs going off and there
[Guest]: was a stunt crew and all there but and I would also do stuff like drop one of them in the
[Guest]: middle of Ganpati Visarjan and two people have to go find them in the middle of it I
[Guest]: got lost the camera crew got lost trying to shoot them I was groped I'm sure many of my
[Guest]: crew were groped as well but we would think of these really bizarre ideas thankfully the
[Guest]: entire crew was men I'm just putting it out there and it was I think we're doing all of
[Guest]: those but in general I loved it the only things I cringe about whenever I try to do a format
[Guest]: that wasn't Bollywood or reality I've always been terrible at it which required editorial
[Guest]: or did I required finesse so I remember doing a tech show for channel B when I was there
[Guest]: and it required animation I'm like how tough can animation be the animator is busy so I
[Guest]: just made my own animation I didn't know how to animate I just learned I did something
[Guest]: random put it up on television I don't know how it went on television and suddenly the
[Guest]: creative director of channel B looking at TV saying what is that actually so I was pulled
[Guest]: up and I was like the animator was busy right so when look at some of those I was like okay
[Guest]: I sometimes pushed it too far with almost being cocky about it more than being lazy
[Guest]: I think I was just cocky about it because I was really I feel that once you're in a
[Guest]: certain flow and you're doing shows when you when you skip to a different format you need
[Guest]: to skip your mindset and I didn't skip I was still functioning the way I would I actually
[Guest]: even moved to channel B to do Bollywood shows because nobody in channel B wanted to touch
[Guest]: Hindi because channel B is still doing English and I love working in Bollywood for me it
[Guest]: was like okay one second I've gone to Amitabh Bachchan's house for a shoot I've gotten to
[Guest]: meet him shake his hand I've been able to shoot in a set with Ram Gopal Verma to create
[Guest]: a set for Sanjay Leela Bansali so for me I would still you know you revel in those at
[Guest]: that point of time because you have some of those things in your head and I think it was
[Guest]: great fun to do and I have a lot of fond remembrances of my entire Bollywood shoot period but I
[Guest]: don't cringe at any of that what I might cringe at would be me trying to do stuff which I
[Guest]: should not have tried doing like animation but so none of my tastes I ever cringe at
[Guest]: because I feel I still go back to many of them with music is a great example for me
[Guest]: I listen to every single genre possible apart from classical maybe classical something I
[Guest]: still I have a I say I have a spik makeh problem which is that and when you're younger if you
[Guest]: go for enough spik makeh concerts you have a certain aversion to Indian classical music
[Guest]: if you're too young to understand it so when you grow up you tend to not want to listen
[Guest]: to it it's not my mother's fault it's not anyone's fault it's just that I just did not
[Guest]: have taste when I was younger but yeah so I don't I don't cringe at any of those things
[Guest]: I would just say that doing shows like where I put animations up and doing kidnap were
[Guest]: two cringe pieces and kidnap actually made me also realize I wanted to quit because by
[Guest]: then reality TV had reached that point where you didn't have to press those buttons to
[Guest]: get them to react people were reacting on camera because they knew that would get them
[Guest]: footage so for me that took the fun away of it the fun of looking at what will psychologically
[Guest]: make this person react and really plan stuff out was no longer needed you could set it
[Guest]: up and people were reacting anyway so that they'd be seen a certain way on camera and
[Guest]: I'm like I'm not here to get like people to act and never really excited me so that's
[Amit Varma]: also something which made me tune out and in a sense that sort of extreme move in reality
[Amit Varma]: TV where people are reacting because you know it's expected of them also presages the coming
[Amit Varma]: age of social media where everything is performative anyway but you know let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break and after we do we'll come back to 2009 and you know the changing times and what you
[Amit Varma]: then went on to do next. Long before I was a podcaster I was a writer in fact chances
[Amit Varma]: are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut which was active between
[Amit Varma]: 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time I love the freedom the form gave
[Amit Varma]: me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways I exercise my writing muscle every day and
[Amit Varma]: was forced to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things
[Amit Varma]: well that phase in my life ended for various reasons and now it is time to revive it only
[Amit Varma]: now I'm doing it through a newsletter I have started the India Uncut newsletter at IndiaUncut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else so please do head on over to IndiaUncut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe it is free once you sign up each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox you don't need to go anywhere so subscribe now for free the India
[Amit Varma]: Uncut newsletter at IndiaUncut.substack.com thank you
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene and the unseen I'm chatting with Varun Duggirala about his fascinating
[Amit Varma]: life and journey and we've reached 2009 where obviously there is at a proximate level one
[Amit Varma]: interesting shift where you know you leave Channel V and you start your own advertising
[Amit Varma]: agency The Glitch but you've also spoken in the past about how you know it's not just
[Amit Varma]: a career change there's sort of a ton of stuff happening around at time television is changing
[Amit Varma]: digital is coming up the internet is changing the way people consume information and all
[Amit Varma]: of that so tell me a little bit about that what about those changing times is sort of
[Guest]: driving whatever is happening so this is I think from around 2006 2007 there was a bit
[Guest]: of an interesting period right it was an interesting period mainly because on one end digital was
[Guest]: just becoming a thing I remember Channel V used to have their website MTVIndia.com those
[Guest]: were early days of people really putting up curated content online and I remember there
[Guest]: used to be even for music I remember Arjun Ravi used to run a website forgetting the
[Guest]: name right now which which used to kind of curate stuff around indie music and so weird
[Guest]: for us who would work in music television who would go to a website which used to curate
[Guest]: indie music to kind of get what was happening there because we had gone beyond that and
[Guest]: we were primarily playing Bollywood by then our jobs were to do reality TV there were
[Guest]: very few music videos non you know regular going on and although I was lucky enough to
[Guest]: be one of the last people to do a show called Launchpad for Channel V which is a show to
[Guest]: find next big rock band and stuff like that and before rock on and everything else that
[Guest]: happened post that and I remember when we were doing that as well it was a lot about
[Guest]: let's find different languages who would kind of come in so we would we got a band in from
[Guest]: Cal who sang in English but Cassini's Division was a legendary band we had a Hindi band called
[Guest]: Farid Kote who still play they still they've composed a few movies and stuff so we had
[Guest]: all that going but it was still largely repetitive because I was going from one reality show
[Guest]: to the other I had almost quit twice I'd almost gone back to MTV because I still had one bucket
[Guest]: list right but I never produced roadies and I always wanted to produce roadies because
[Guest]: it's just a journey and the what that involved at that point of time something I always wanted
[Guest]: to do so I almost quit I would say I once walked up to Zulfia who was my then boss and
[Guest]: I was just going to quit she doesn't know this and she said do you want to launchpad
[Guest]: I said okay I'll stay in my head right so I stayed and I did that show and but I feel
[Guest]: that me and Rohit had come to that point where we had grown up the ranks really quickly in
[Guest]: our time in Channel V because when we were in Channel V and he used to shoot promos and
[Guest]: I would shoot shows there was a set of people who were senior to us who happened to quit
[Guest]: around the same time so suddenly we were assistants who suddenly became producers very quickly
[Guest]: and we learned those things by hook or like literally like we had to learn on the job
[Guest]: right so a lot of the stuff kind of were put deep into the deep end and figured it out
[Guest]: but when Channel V said we're not going to play music anymore and we're going youth
[Guest]: GEC we're going to do fiction that's when we're like okay we can stay here we'll have
[Guest]: great careers and Rohit said I think I want to quit and do something on my own and I'm
[Guest]: like what are you planning to do when you say I don't know I will we'll do something
[Guest]: maybe try something with digital video and stuff like that I didn't know what you were
[Guest]: going to do he didn't know what you were going to do I said okay even I'll quit and there's
[Guest]: a line which I stick by and I stick by that most times I feel this is one of those benchmarks
[Guest]: you need to have is what's the worst that can happen right and so worst case we find
[Guest]: a job and it'll and this will fail because we didn't really have responsibilities right
[Guest]: we had to we used to say we're paying for bed bread and beer as long as had money for
[Guest]: those three you'd survive we spent six months thinking of the name one month trying to figure
[Guest]: out what work we would do quit when we when we were leaving everyone told us the mistake
[Guest]: was post recession India in the world at 2009 2008 was you know world was in a people really
[Guest]: were trying to hold on to their jobs and here these two young guys who are doing reasonably
[Guest]: well would not have lost their jobs or quitting to start a company we didn't even know who
[Guest]: will give us work and we had one project one and a half and we finished that project and
[Guest]: we didn't actually didn't have work for I think about two weeks two three weeks and
[Guest]: we were like sitting at home because we didn't know how this worked we just thought we talked
[Guest]: to a few people and we'll get some work we never got it and that's when we really started
[Guest]: to understand that we need to be open to doing anything and everything so we started off
[Guest]: as a production house because he used to direct I was a terrible director but I could edit
[Guest]: and produce so we would take turns editing I would produce and you would direct and we
[Guest]: just took projects like that but we kept trying to do stuff in digital so we would pitch some
[Guest]: stuff and we both geeks in our own right of the stuff we geek out on I'm both was huge
[Guest]: into tech just fiddling around with doing stuff with it so we would pitch stuff on the
[Guest]: side but we would still do like I remember we used to one of the first projects I'll
[Guest]: never forget we used to do promos for Disney so for the DVD section so we would do a promo
[Guest]: for princess and the frog DVD coming out so you have this DVD come out as an animation
[Guest]: and and it would have a voiceover and so we get a voiceover recorded too we do projects
[Guest]: like that we made a we made Priyanka Chopra showreel for her to go to Hollywood one of
[Guest]: our first projects because I remember all the UTV DVDs had come to our house amongst
[Guest]: others and we had to run through all of them find those shots to show her range of acting
[Guest]: and and we got and we were stupid enough to take that money and go buy a TV like we would
[Guest]: do stuff like that in the early days but at some point I think six eight months late in
[Guest]: we did but I think yeah but we're 2010 ish we had Prashant who's actually still with
[Guest]: us who wrote in and said can I intern with you guys I'm hearing you guys are doing some
[Guest]: fun stuff and so he came in from Simbi realized our office was our apartment slept on a couch
[Guest]: worked on project went back and he said will you guys hire me and that's when we actually
[Guest]: became a company because we realized we're hiring someone and we had a few other people
[Guest]: and a lot of these initial set up people who weirdly connected to us even also Prashant
[Guest]: on his third stint with Glitch now so he quit a couple of times come back wants to be an
[Guest]: entrepreneur wants more to to work for Apple for a bit and there's a second employee was
[Guest]: a guy called Venky who came in who incidentally now works for Netflix and we end up doing
[Guest]: some stuff together in that sense right so in a weird way that a lot of these characters
[Guest]: were still around in our lives but that was also a time when people didn't really get
[Guest]: digital even I think we were looking at as a fun like it's what podcasting is now right
[Guest]: people it's experimental budget for all brands if at all and and so we would go pitch really
[Guest]: random activations and stuff that would like you know if someone tweets this to this thing
[Guest]: then a random nerf gun would fire something at a target and if you hit the target your
[Guest]: handle will come on the screen right we would we would pitch stuff like that or that we
[Guest]: used to do stunts like diesel was turning into and they had to make a bring people to
[Guest]: their sale website and the websites creation had taken so long they had one week for launch
[Guest]: and had not done any publicity so we made a bunch of hundred people change their relationship
[Guest]: status on Facebook from single or whatever it was to in a relationship and we had Roshan
[Guest]: who unfortunately had to go from married to in a relationship and he had to answer to
[Guest]: a few people on that front not necessarily shine because she was fine and because we
[Guest]: made them all post saying because single is boring and twosome is awesome diesel turns
[Guest]: to dot-com right so if you do stupid stuff like that and like thousand percent increase
[Guest]: in traffic on the website because nobody was on the website so in hindsight thousand percent
[Guest]: isn't much when you look at it that way but we would pitch that stuff but also do television
[Guest]: we would shoot stuff for having MTV was still a client been thus was a client we continue
[Guest]: to make that pay the bills and then slowly but surely became a company somewhere in between
[Guest]: and and became an agency at a later point when at some point brand said you guys are
[Guest]: doing all the fun stuff do you also want to do strategy and we're like how tough can it
[Guest]: be we realize it is much tougher than we thought it was but that's how we became an agency
[Amit Varma]: much later so you know a lot of what you're saying actually brings back memories and it's
[Amit Varma]: very interesting how you know our journeys over a few years apart has these sort of resonances
[Amit Varma]: in the sense I straight out of college I went into advertising and then channel B and then
[Amit Varma]: MTV and you seem to have taken kind of the reverse path and also in the late 1990s I
[Amit Varma]: you know I was one of the judges at this event called the great Indian rock which was done
[Amit Varma]: by Rock Street Journal and MTV together to find the next great Indian rock hope and it's
[Amit Varma]: around that time also that channel we announced that they were not going to be a music channel
[Amit Varma]: but a youth channel in their words around 99 and of course they didn't make the definitive
[Amit Varma]: shift until much later but they carried out a grand experiment in 99 which didn't quite
[Amit Varma]: work out in fact I shifted back from MTV I shifted back to channel B for a second time
[Amit Varma]: around that period now you know my number of thoughts that come up here and number one
[Amit Varma]: is that you know did it make a difference that you were in a sense coming into this
[Amit Varma]: business of advertising not with an advertising background as you would expect that people
[Amit Varma]: have worked in ad agencies and then they've said we'll strike out on our own but from
[Amit Varma]: a television background so you're coming at it from a completely different angle and that
[Amit Varma]: makes a difference to how you look at it and what you offer and at the broader question
[Amit Varma]: is that do different angles matter because even when you come before that into media
[Amit Varma]: you've got that engineering background right you've done engineering and then you're doing
[Amit Varma]: mass comm so in a sense there is already a little bit of a difference between you and
[Amit Varma]: the other guys you know and and maybe your early love for coding played a part in that
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if coding you know helps you think in a more structured way or whether
[Amit Varma]: it just attracts the people who think in a more structured way and the causation is the
[Amit Varma]: other way around so one you know do these different frames of reference that you bring
[Amit Varma]: into something help you stand out from what's already in the field and that's number one
[Amit Varma]: and number two is that do you think that because you weren't from an agency background and
[Amit Varma]: you don't have those sort of set conventions and ways of looking at the world that you
[Amit Varma]: brought something to the table or you saw something that others did not see I feel like
[Guest]: the legacy baggage that comes with advertising right and I feel advertising suffers even
[Guest]: today with that I don't have any of that even though now I've been in it long enough thankfully
[Guest]: because there is beauty to how advertising used to be done and there are many elements
[Guest]: of that that still stay but it's a very different world and interestingly what's been constant
[Guest]: in our lives is when we got into the agency side is that we were a digital agency right
[Guest]: the digital agency of that time was a lot more focused on websites and banner ads and
[Guest]: all that stuff and and we came from production so our edge was we knew video and we knew
[Guest]: how that was produced so we would go and pitch stuff which nobody would even like think was
[Guest]: possible right like an example I remember we did something for Conetto around Valentine's
[Guest]: Day where we said you can I think we could tweet or write was on Facebook and give us
[Guest]: any lyrics and we have a set of cupids with musical instruments who would make that into
[Guest]: a song and post it for you to share we actually went and took 11 small tiny studios those
[Guest]: small ones you get in you know which you get for auditions and we dressed up guys as cupid
[Guest]: people who are musicians put cameras on them had an editing ready we built a software to
[Guest]: be able to edit that out in the software half the time did not work so we actually had to
[Guest]: have manual editors in place so a guy would write in meow meow and this guy would make
[Guest]: meow meow into a tune and it would go on to the page that we did that over three to four
[Guest]: days and what people didn't get was traditionally how even advertising video was shot was never
[Guest]: shot like this we were taking our learnings from the hustle that MTV and channel we had
[Guest]: taught us and brought it here and we would do stuff like this so by the time we got to
[Guest]: being an agency in an agency lens Brian said we want that we want that mindset but also
[Guest]: with you managing what you put on social because we were very clear we're not a social agency
[Guest]: we'll continue to do all the we'll do video we'll do interventions we'll do all of that
[Guest]: for you and and that's how it became one and then we learned the ropes of I remember when
[Guest]: we first started pitching stuff to do on Facebook we had people who said but Facebook's free
[Guest]: why should we pay you to do it right we've actually heard those things and it was so
[Guest]: interesting when I think back on it because people didn't necessarily know what to do
[Guest]: with social it was another you know in the checklist it was the lowest item that you
[Guest]: need to have a Facebook page you need to have a Twitter account and maybe be on Google plus
[Guest]: used to be a thing and many of those and we would just keep pitching stuff and thankfully
[Guest]: because of video and because we did stuff with clients so people didn't really think
[Guest]: about so we would go to movies right so we would do something for with YouTube motion
[Guest]: pictures for Burfi or we would go to Balaji motion pictures and do something so we would
[Guest]: go to these guys we know they'll want to experiment because shots man want to get buzzed in and
[Guest]: we do the bizarrest of ideas and then suddenly brands like a Unilever etc who we were doing
[Guest]: smaller productions for so can you do this also for us and we still kept the ship sailing
[Guest]: by doing TV production so we did an MTV unplugged we did a season of that we did all of you
[Guest]: continue to do those shows till we reached a point where we had a team who understood
[Guest]: so I'm not an angy person I'm still not I still look at the production and content business
[Guest]: thankfully have been able to stick to that my entire career Rohit's always been the more
[Guest]: creative person who understood the nuances to a broader extent of advertising and design
[Guest]: especially so he kind of focused on that and at some point Pooja came in and because Pooja
[Guest]: had that experience she helped bring some of that structure that agencies require which
[Guest]: we didn't have before she came in and she brought that structure in and that's why I
[Guest]: think it truly became an agency I think we were we were still a we were still a fun buzz-creating
[Guest]: agency who had a bunch of accounts but were not necessarily long-standing accounts till
[Guest]: Pooja came on Pooja came in a good structure but she channelized the the madness of what
[Guest]: we would come up with and do which would surprise everybody that this is the kind of stuff and
[Guest]: it's not just us that the team we had built over time would think of these outlandish
[Guest]: things to do like an outlandish sometimes is not the obvious so I remember when we did
[Guest]: the season of MTV Unplugged the biggest ask was and I remember Aditya Swamy who was then
[Guest]: the head of MTV had asked us and guys we're doing MTV Unplugged here but most times in
[Guest]: India you have to get a you can have to get a crowd that's not necessarily the audience
[Guest]: who wants to listen to the music right and we don't want to do that and because that
[Guest]: was that's additional practice most of the audience you see in all your TV shows are
[Guest]: paid audience you know the people are paid to sit there and clap said I want actual people
[Guest]: can you crack that for me so we figured a digital activation where we had a bus go around
[Guest]: Bombay saying KK is going to be doing an MTV Unplugged we'll pick you up we'll take you
[Guest]: to Trombe which is the outskirts of Bombay so that's the studio we were shooting it spend
[Guest]: the day there be in the audience figure a way to record it because most times you end
[Guest]: up doing some songs twice just to get a couple of extra shots get to interact with the talent
[Guest]: come back and so it became an experience plus a show which was never the way it was done
[Guest]: so we'd always find these hacks to do it and I think I'm one of our turning points was
[Guest]: a show called Nano Drive with MTV where we really became digital in our mindset in in
[Guest]: a social world because what we were doing was he was sending four nanos into four parts
[Guest]: of India with four people in them and every day we would be uploading videos of what happened
[Guest]: in that day within that day like so shoot the whole day edit at night upload by morning
[Guest]: and basis the number of and think about it in hindsight this is the number of views retweets
[Guest]: or likes they got they would get points which could eventually convert into prize money
[Guest]: wow so and the logistical nightmare that was and this is not like post geo India this is
[Guest]: pre geo India so we would have those internet dongles that you would carry around every
[Guest]: form of internet would fail at most times some edit machine would fail in the most bizarrest
[Guest]: of places we did three seasons of that and I think those three seasons taught us how
[Guest]: social influence worked how you can really create different kinds of content online that
[Guest]: can get this and and because we were doing all of that it helped us with the brands because
[Guest]: the brand saw that we were doing these things like how much of that can we tap into so we
[Guest]: had that madness with some form of a strategic thought that kind of came in over time and
[Guest]: then that's a scaled up and became the agency which is why when whenever someone asked me
[Guest]: that I'm an advertising person now I still say I'm not an advertising person I'm still
[Guest]: a content person I'm still a production person because I think that at the at the root of
[Amit Varma]: it I'm still that and you know a fundamental question about advertising it seems that what
[Amit Varma]: has also happened over maybe the last 20 years is that advertising has changed in many basic
[Amit Varma]: ways for example you know just from the point of view of a creator one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: kind of delights me about the modern age is that you know if I want to connect with my
[Amit Varma]: audience I can now go directly I do not need a platform and typically what would happen
[Amit Varma]: is I would sell whatever I am doing to a platform or make it for them they would then sell advertising
[Amit Varma]: and I would get a little chunk of that and now all of that loop from a creator's point
[Amit Varma]: of view is completely bypassed I don't need the platform and therefore an advertising
[Amit Varma]: you know as you know Prem Panicker in the last episode that we did and you know he was
[Amit Varma]: the editor at a number of online publications like Rediff and Yahoo and all that and he
[Amit Varma]: was pointing out how it's gone from you know dollars to pennies for comparatively the same
[Amit Varma]: whatever so in a sense there is a sense of you know advertising going sort of downhill
[Amit Varma]: in that sense and the particular period of time which you're talking about when digital
[Amit Varma]: comes up is like like one of the things that you've spoken about earlier is how you needed
[Amit Varma]: to change the mindset of your clients and tell them quote don't do one big TVC you need
[Amit Varma]: 300 pieces of content in a year so instead of thinking about you know one big television
[Amit Varma]: commercial which they'll play everywhere and they'll buy space on you know maybe Doordarshan
[Amit Varma]: in the 80s or all the different satellite channels in the 90s now you gotta think of
[Amit Varma]: this mix of stuff how difficult was it and also the other mindset shift is that very
[Amit Varma]: often what happens is when a new media comes it becomes one of the boxes so you say Facebook
[Amit Varma]: and Instagram and you take those boxes and you're done and you don't really put your
[Amit Varma]: heart into it and it's just stuff that you do and you know it becomes that kind of a
[Amit Varma]: game so what were these mindset shifts both in terms of getting others to sort of change
[Amit Varma]: their mindset in this way and your own mindset shift like one of course it helps that you
[Amit Varma]: come from television but did it also make a difference that you're part of a generation
[Amit Varma]: which is used to digital which is used to you know consuming on multiple screens as
[Amit Varma]: part of sort of your growing up and taking in the world which might have been very different
[Amit Varma]: from some of the sort of managers you're speaking to at these various brands a few things happened
[Guest]: around that time and I feel it took a certain transition you know when we first started
[Guest]: doing stuff that agencies do we were always those people you know you would not even sit
[Guest]: on the chairs around the table in those meeting rooms that you will be standing at the back
[Guest]: because you'd have someone talk about the campaign etc and then okay it's clay social
[Guest]: make occurring your display digital becker you almost become that at the end of it was
[Guest]: never the the prime point we've worked very hard I think a lot of us in that generation
[Guest]: of agency there's us there's web chutney a bunch of us we work very hard to have that
[Guest]: seat at the team and we did that by showing a few things we showed them true value in
[Guest]: terms of what they could get out of it and I feel the learning has been in three stages
[Guest]: consumers learned first because consumer behavior move very quickly right as soon as they could
[Guest]: get the internet and start doing stuff with it consumers adopted this like that this whole
[Guest]: mobile first India piece is so important to think about because we tend to compare things
[Guest]: to how the West does it and the West even now for me is a lot more drilled on from laptop
[Guest]: and computer culture India is very mobile culture like that's how our consumers function
[Guest]: that's a very important distinction to make us be very naturally that way I go back to
[Guest]: my AOL call center days and I think about how they were and the issues they had and
[Guest]: I remember that they were so analog even at that time and so because of that what happened
[Guest]: here was that a the consumer shifting and the brands are trying to figure out what to
[Guest]: do the brands adapted first I have to give them credit for that most brands including
[Guest]: larger ones like I feel like even someone like a Unilever who's fairly large I have
[Guest]: seen that transition from how they were when we started working with them in way back in
[Guest]: 2011 to now and even then it was a focus area for them they were still figuring it out and
[Guest]: now it's a prime focus area for them so I've seen that with many of them so they who kind
[Guest]: of moved early agencies moved last agencies for me not necessarily guys like us who were
[Guest]: anyway doing what we were doing and didn't really care about the traditional stuff the
[Guest]: traditional players in many ways because they also were doing a lot of things which weren't
[Guest]: really threatened as much by digital then so was doing what they were really good at
[Guest]: like you making great television commercials and you were doing you know those those long
[Guest]: planning sessions and all of those things and at some point when these two moved fast
[Guest]: and then you had a bunch of these brands coming in who was selling only on digital that you
[Guest]: have your your startups or your d2c brands and when that happened stuff moved so quickly
[Guest]: that's when the agency space really got disrupted because brands suddenly switch quickly to
[Guest]: say okay let's put because for a brand in many cases become easier because once again
[Guest]: this completes my loop I can see where my products being sold what piece of marketing
[Guest]: for me will is getting me to get someone to hit buy on a website and suddenly so they
[Guest]: start moving quickly and everybody started to adapt and now we're in another weird point
[Guest]: of flux in the industry which is what I find interesting and it's already happening but
[Guest]: I see the largest option happening is that right before the agency is for the central
[Guest]: point of creativity now I feel the brands are agencies are helping facilitate the creativity
[Guest]: in many ways I'm it's very I know there will be people who will tell me what I've seen
[Guest]: right now is sacrilege but I truly believe that I feel that brands are taking the ownership
[Guest]: of the overall brand and creativity a lot more now than they ever did you know just
[Guest]: because it is easier to go to an agency and they would handle it for years the number
[Guest]: of pitches that will happen the number of people who will come in for each and every
[Guest]: project the number of collaborations that are required I am seeing more and more the
[Guest]: brand teams are filled with people who are thinking of it from a creative lens and so
[Guest]: they're pulling in collaborators so the agency's role is almost to be in a way your navigator
[Guest]: saying okay great set of things don't do this this is how it will affect you or you want
[Guest]: to produce 50,000 pieces of creative in a year this is how I can help you do it at the
[Guest]: best ROI or this is how you need to work with data this is how you need to work with your
[Guest]: media so we are navigators now we're not necessarily people holding the rails in that sense right
[Guest]: so that's the ship that's happened everyone's adapting to it but when I look at how our
[Guest]: journey has been and look at how things have changed I think the change has really been
[Guest]: the day you could turn around from being a marketing team that would say I'm helping
[Guest]: you market your product to saying I'm a marketing that helps sell your product that's when the
[Guest]: whole game changed because suddenly you are actually controlling sales and that just changes
[Guest]: the whole game because you suddenly have that happening and then your distribution channels
[Guest]: of old which were you know what's your channel of sending it to different stores across the
[Guest]: country and all of that and suddenly ecom came in and suddenly those didn't matter right
[Guest]: so you can have a tiny startup who just distributing off online who can hit as much sales as some
[Guest]: of the biggest established players of decades or if not longer so that's really been the
[Amit Varma]: change so you know I want to drill down on something interesting you said like you know
[Amit Varma]: when I joined advertising in 94 there was this old quote going around or not this old
[Amit Varma]: quote going around then but I heard it then by John Wanamaker saying half the money I
[Amit Varma]: spent on advertising is wasted but I don't know which half and when I did a recent episode
[Amit Varma]: with Ambi Parmeswaran the ad guru he spoke about how a lot of digital marketing or digital
[Amit Varma]: advertising is prey and prey that you know you don't really know what's going on and
[Amit Varma]: I chatted with him about metrics as well which I want to ask you about because you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that you know you said that there was a shift where brands began to take attention
[Amit Varma]: of you when they realized that you're not just going to help them market the product
[Amit Varma]: you're going to help them sell it does this to drill down in this does it then mean that
[Amit Varma]: what you are doing the kind of advertising that you are doing is actually quantifiable
[Amit Varma]: that there are metrics that can actually show the impact so that old dilemma of I don't
[Amit Varma]: know you know whether this is truly effective or not it's just a box I have to take does
[Amit Varma]: that old dilemma then go away is it possible to quantify effectiveness so it's extremely
[Guest]: quantifiable to a larger extent than it has been before provided this is the one big provider
[Guest]: that you set what you're what are you setting benchmarks against like what do you want to
[Guest]: achieve and that's really important many times when that gets missed no matter what you might
[Guest]: get as metrics whatever might happen that is where you end up failing and it's also
[Guest]: an iterative game it's no longer okay let's make that one perfect piece and have it go
[Guest]: there so it's also iterative so you're trying stuff out seeing something that works doesn't
[Guest]: work I give an old television analogy that you know how you would program a television
[Guest]: channel for the shows and what would follow what and what you would make a programming
[Guest]: calendar for the year that's what brands are doing now right so you'll have some stuff
[Guest]: that will fail some stuff that will work but at the end of the year you're looking back
[Guest]: and say I did a bunch of these things these things didn't work these things worked these
[Guest]: are my learnings and I'm moving ahead next year and and that's really the way it is happening
[Guest]: I agree with ambi I think that there's a lot of the so measurement is a tricky thing because
[Guest]: I feel that the word data is thrown around very very in a very loose form data is not
[Guest]: important what data you look at and how we interpret is important so in most cases what
[Guest]: happens is you will try to find data to prove what your idea is to be right rather than
[Guest]: looking at data and deriving your idea from it which is the right way to do it so there's
[Guest]: this piece that we say in office a lot um i know roid says it uh the most is that data
[Guest]: is a creative director's best friend because what you would have you know the quintessential
[Guest]: creative director would walk around outside find inspiration in something and kind of
[Guest]: come back now it's that same creator looking at a stream of data and really getting some
[Guest]: insights from that so it's it's about how you look at it and i feel and again data and
[Guest]: content two words that are the most widely used for for bizarrely random reasons uh across
[Guest]: the industry but data is truly just that you're getting the insights you would get by doing
[Guest]: 10 market visits talking to 50 100 consumers you're getting that by looking at the stream
[Guest]: of a piece on a monitor um and as long as you use that right um then that's good data
[Guest]: and i think we're also moving towards a slightly more secure form of doing this right we're
[Guest]: moving towards first party data we're moving towards all of that and i think while that
[Guest]: does affect the business i feel it's important because at some point the consumer should
[Guest]: not be the product and i feel that at some times the tendency is to use data to kind
[Guest]: of get to them as the best way you can for the business but it's important to kind of
[Guest]: have that difference in your head but i think that thankfully it is the way i've seen most
[Guest]: brands are very who we've worked with have always been very cognizant of that you know
[Guest]: there's a line and they don't necessarily want to cross it and you know you called your
[Amit Varma]: podcast when you started it advertising is dead and which is of course a provocative
[Amit Varma]: title coming from an ad man though you claim you're not an ad man but what the hell uh
[Amit Varma]: now what is the scene for advertising is it actually dying because it strikes me that
[Amit Varma]: you know when i look at it from the content point of view a lot of the content i consume
[Amit Varma]: most of the content i consume has no advertising i've put ad blockers on my browser i subscribe
[Amit Varma]: to netflix and amazon prime and i'm you know consuming from there i literally don't watch
[Amit Varma]: any television the only advertising i consume is possibly during cricket matches when i
[Amit Varma]: can you know just mute the damn thing and similarly as a creator i find that now whatever
[Amit Varma]: money i make is coming directly from people it is not coming through i mean i do get some
[Amit Varma]: advertising thankfully on my show after all this time but it's a small chunk of what i
[Amit Varma]: otherwise make and the direction in general seems to be even for creators to not have
[Amit Varma]: to rely on it so much so now the point is that if content is not uh you know reliant
[Amit Varma]: on advertising you know if that bridge is broken people are willing to just pay directly
[Amit Varma]: for content what's the future for advertising you know what are your sort of thoughts on
[Amit Varma]: this because i am looking at it very much from uh the outside this is not something
[Guest]: i have ever thought deeply about so enlighten me so there are a few things that are happening
[Guest]: which is why sometimes you think about is the term agency or advertising right for what
[Guest]: we do there are parts to what the agency business is right now one big chunk is digital transformation
[Guest]: so you're helping clients to transform every part of their operation to digital right so
[Guest]: in some ways you're competing on one end with an accenture and a deloitte etc because you're
[Guest]: helping them build those large tech builds so everything from looking at how they function
[Guest]: internally how to add digital elements into that adding tech into that process flows everything
[Guest]: well so there's that's one part big part of what agencies are doing now then there is
[Guest]: a big amount of work we're doing even on like i think the technology part of the agency
[Guest]: business now is so large it doesn't get talked about enough uh you know you're doing stuff
[Guest]: around salesforce implementation crm you're doing a lot of that and i see a lot of that
[Guest]: growing and scaling and it's being very stable businesses for agencies the creative part
[Guest]: of the business i feel is the one that is actually died in some form um when i think
[Guest]: of how the classical way of it right i think the so i you know that i'm a huge scott galloway
[Guest]: fanboy one of the things he says which i always like is that he says advertising is the tax
[Guest]: of the poor he was the word poor i don't like the word poor but all of the people who can't
[Guest]: pay for subscription is how i like to term it um and i think that's important there's
[Guest]: still a large amount of people who still are okay to get something for free with an ad
[Guest]: in between and eventually they will pay for uh you know not getting those ads in between
[Guest]: uh you know their content so that's still relevant what i feel is important to note
[Guest]: is that whatever you make as advertising now has to be relevant for the audience now and
[Guest]: not the old um for instance whenever someone talks about okay did you see the ads during
[Guest]: the ipl i say that you realize when an ad comes on people are looking at their phone
[Guest]: because if they're watching it on tv they're looking at their phone they're not necessarily
[Guest]: paying attention to the ad right so um then what are you making on as an ad that is playing
[Guest]: on their on that phone for me is more relevant than what's playing on tv um and i think those
[Guest]: nuances are there so content will still always be the prime focus on the creative side but
[Guest]: when whatever you're creating now has to have far bigger legs as a piece that you would
[Guest]: share when i think of some of the biggest disruptors in the ads some of the not disruptors
[Guest]: some people have done the most brilliant work in recent times like for me maximum effort
[Guest]: uh which is ryan reynolds's brand company is a phenomenal case study right like here's
[Guest]: a guy who is so creative as an actor and everything else and he's genuinely funny builds this
[Guest]: company that does really interesting pieces around some of the brands he owns and the
[Guest]: movies he works on that they are now considered to be some of the most innovative coming up
[Guest]: with some of the most innovative ideas around stuff that happens and he's doing that because
[Guest]: he's thinking digital he's thinking what is shareable and he's thinking on the fly versus
[Guest]: you don't have two months to come up with a script and shoot something you know how
[Guest]: do you do it um martin sorrell famously says faster better cheaper is his focus now with
[Guest]: media monks and s4 and what he's doing and clients want faster better cheaper but i feel
[Guest]: clients also want true value and i feel that that's what we're doing so whenever we're
[Guest]: creating we're also not just talking about the creative idea we talk about how creating
[Guest]: it a certain way will make them spend lesser in the short term and in the long term i use
[Guest]: the word tech stack more than i've ever done in production context over the last year and
[Guest]: a half than i ever have so the actual part which you've always spoken about in advertising
[Guest]: which is okay let's make the film and let's talk about something so i have not spent any
[Guest]: time doing that in in recent years i know a large amount of my team focus a lot on the
[Guest]: strategy part and that's still very relevant we're still thinking long term but the classical
[Guest]: madman-esque advertising for me is dead because that's now a small part of what brands will
[Guest]: do um in the future and that's going to go down more and more what will stay is what
[Guest]: all are you creating to connect to every single category of consumer so you know and all of
[Guest]: that stuff so and i've given a slightly long winding and and and you know in most cases
[Guest]: random response to your question but there are so many pieces to the advertising business
[Guest]: now that what was traditionally known as the ad business is now a small part of it it's
[Amit Varma]: no longer the whole of it that's fascinating so again i'll think aloud and you know i hope
[Amit Varma]: you and other people who really know advertising will forgive me if this next question is a
[Amit Varma]: bit naive but let's do a thought experiment you know you just spoke about how scott galloway
[Amit Varma]: spoke about advertising being a tax on the poor and uh so on let's do a thought experiment
[Amit Varma]: let's say that at some point in the future and hopefully sooner or later either we go
[Amit Varma]: extinct or this happens there's a sort of post scarcity world where in a sense nobody
[Amit Varma]: is too poor to pay for content so everyone's paying for content nobody needs to have their
[Amit Varma]: attention um you know sold as a product so to say which is what advertising uh typically
[Amit Varma]: is and uh so what does the advertiser do because on the one hand as a consumer i do want to
[Amit Varma]: know what is out there and uh all of that but at the same time i don't want any intrusions
[Amit Varma]: uh on my attention if i'm watching content i want to watch content you know i'm like
[Amit Varma]: obviously i'm one of the privilege but i i'm subscribing to youtube premium so even there
[Amit Varma]: i don't see ads netflix prime all of that and presumably there will be similar options
[Amit Varma]: for any kind of content at all so thought experiment utopian or dystopian world for
[Amit Varma]: the advertising people where so then what does a brand do how do brands reach people
[Amit Varma]: what is advertising then is an agency just the people who are doing tech backends and
[Amit Varma]: crm and you know whatever else you spoke about or how are they actually managing to get their
[Guest]: products in front of the consumer a large part of what you said is already happening
[Guest]: and i feel it's already a point in in focus so think of what you consume which brands
[Guest]: are all still a part of even though they're not ads right um think of the entire creator
[Guest]: and influencer economy the influencer economy especially right so people do follow so many
[Guest]: creators slash influencers primarily because of the brand stuff so which is why a lot of
[Guest]: the startups focus so much on that and and i've noticed this right you'll have a startup
[Guest]: they'll they'll do primary focus on performance marketing and e-commerce do influencer marketing
[Guest]: raise a few rounds come to that get that series a round in then go get that big agency do
[Guest]: that big campaign right because in a country like india i feel for at least in the near
[Guest]: future you traditional mediums are still relevant tv is not going anywhere hoardings aren't
[Guest]: going anywhere a lot of that stuff is still here to stay print i have my own questions
[Guest]: on but that's i think more in terms of maybe my habit than i think the like i know people
[Guest]: that in my house here read the newspaper right i don't um and so i feel that's more my own
[Guest]: personal uh prejudice if that's the word to use and so when i look at it from that sense
[Guest]: the advertising business in the future will exist wherever brands are they have to connect
[Guest]: with the consumer today it's on an instagram on an amazon on um you know on a youtube it
[Guest]: might not necessarily just be as an ad i've spent the last year also studying how creators
[Guest]: monetize and because i thought okay as a podcaster there's there are certain regular ways that
[Guest]: you're known to monetize what are the other ways and i realize there's so much happening
[Guest]: which weirdly enough i didn't know about even though i work in the space right so the amazon
[Guest]: affiliate program for me was a revelation i didn't realize it because i realized a lot
[Guest]: of the tech youtubers i follow all have almost packs you can buy and they make some money
[Guest]: off the fact because you know you follow someone and that guy uses certain equipment you know
[Guest]: okay fine i love the content so this must be legit equipment so you'd end up buying
[Guest]: it and so this person gets something for it similarly how we put some products out there
[Guest]: you know and so i feel that part is going to scale up more and more each individual
[Guest]: now is a media channel to themselves and eventually maybe the entire world is going to be an influencer
[Guest]: at different categories and everybody can just kind of keep making money by putting
[Guest]: stuff out there right i mean from what i hear and i don't know enough about it in china
[Guest]: they've reached a far more advanced stage in this journey than than the rest of the
[Guest]: world has on the other end i feel the traditional ad is going to be one of those big once in
[Guest]: a year blockbuster things right so say how in the us we have the super bowl they have
[Guest]: the super bowl we have the ipl i feel you'll end up having some of these big movement pieces
[Guest]: which will have ads happen i don't think that's going away they'll evolve in how they are
[Guest]: they might become may become content pieces might become cds might become shows you'll
[Guest]: have all those forms and you know brands will invest more and more in this i know brands
[Guest]: who are looking at what they do from an editorial mindset now right so you know you look at
[Guest]: a brand circuit why would you follow a brand online is because not because you want to
[Guest]: see their ad because you want to see what is something about the content they post excites
[Guest]: you or interests you and at some point brands are making that shift to an editorial mindset
[Guest]: so suddenly the content they're putting out is content to itself not necessarily selling
[Guest]: their product um and i use this this term a lot i said consumers either come to you
[Guest]: to get two forms of value one is that you're giving them some value like a great deal you
[Guest]: give them something like that or they'll come to you to connect to their values in some
[Guest]: way and that values doesn't have to seem very hardcore it could be just a form of entertainment
[Guest]: or a genre that you like which really works i mean i i think of a bunch of brands which
[Guest]: are there online which i follow because i just am entertained by what they post and
[Guest]: i think that's really the future the future is that we'll go brands will go a lot more
[Guest]: editorial and they'll realize at some point that that editorial content is also monetizable
[Guest]: it'll be a tiny piece of their pnl but let's say tomorrow if i'm a beauty brand and i'm
[Guest]: doing a lot of these tutorials and everything else and packs and stuff like that at some
[Guest]: point it's helping me sell but what if some of that content is exclusive what if some
[Guest]: of that stuff is only for a subscription-based cohort of consumers and i'm just i'm freewheeling
[Guest]: here in my head maybe someone would pay for that you never know right i mean maybe that's
[Guest]: the future maybe that's the future of what we'll build out as agencies because as long
[Guest]: as brands have to connect with a consumer there'll be some form of this thing called
[Guest]: the agency will it be what it was i don't think so which is why the name of the show
[Guest]: came in the name of the show actually interestingly came from a talk squad gal away game so advertising
[Guest]: is that comes from this thing he keeps saying called the death of there was a video he did
[Guest]: i forgot where i think it was a video from his stern school class where he said the death
[Guest]: of the advertising and industrial um no advertising and marketing um industrial something and
[Guest]: so i said it's too long but if you break it down and advertising is dead is is an interesting
[Guest]: term to use and that's how the name of the show kind of came to be so that's what i truly
[Guest]: believe i think we're already there um it's just that and it's a good thing that you hold
[Guest]: on to certain things which are great there are many beautiful things about how advertising
[Guest]: has been which i've come to learn after becoming part of a network i never realized that while
[Guest]: i was an independent agency but i don't think we're a generation who is nostalgic about
[Guest]: this at least i am not i know the people who are young i know there are a bunch of them
[Guest]: who are i'm not i think things evolve you move ahead you can't stay in the past you
[Guest]: enjoy those you kind of go back and look at those but um yeah i mean so that's that form
[Amit Varma]: of agency that's going to stay so you know i i'm going to uh get some of your thoughts
[Amit Varma]: on the uh content ecosystem and the creator ecosystem as well because that's something
[Amit Varma]: i've also been thinking a lot about over the last one year these are exciting times but
[Amit Varma]: before that uh you know to kind of wrap up your uh not your thoughts on advertising per
[Amit Varma]: se but that part of the journey you know at one point you got acquired by wpp and i assume
[Amit Varma]: things have worked out extremely well for you so you know there is a journey where around
[Amit Varma]: 2009 you leave channel v you say okay this is interesting work this is what we're going
[Amit Varma]: to do you get down to it you go in the directions and you follow those directions and then you
[Amit Varma]: have what i presume is your big payday and you can now chill and do whatever you want
[Amit Varma]: but one you are still in advertising you're still part of the glitch you're still uh sort
[Amit Varma]: of doing whatever and at the same time you are also exploring these other new directions
[Amit Varma]: with first one podcast and then this uh youtube uh podcast of arundhati show and all of that
[Amit Varma]: so my question is that you know in one of your newsletters you've written about how
[Amit Varma]: you need to think about what you're doing for your career and what you're doing for
[Amit Varma]: your life uh in the sense that you have to view one as the means to an end and so how
[Amit Varma]: have your thoughts of sort of you know the kind of work that you want to do evolved over
[Amit Varma]: these last 12 or 13 years since you started the glitch you know where initially you go
[Amit Varma]: out there saying hey we'll you know we'll make me videos for digital and we'll do all
[Amit Varma]: of that and then in that journey presumably as a company grows your mindset is also changing
[Amit Varma]: you're putting your different kinds of processes in place your goals are changing then the
[Amit Varma]: acquisition happens then you discover you know the creator ecosystem and how that's
[Amit Varma]: going but at the same time you have one foot and you're still running the glitch so take
[Guest]: me through your thinking on all of this so when we started glitch rohit and i chose not
[Guest]: to have traditional designations we were called left brain and right brain i was left and
[Guest]: he was right because we thought that sounded cooler but also it felt very like and we just
[Guest]: found it very weird that two guys start a company one becomes ceo one becomes cco and
[Guest]: because we decided none of us will be neither of us will be ceo so puja has been our first
[Guest]: ceo which because the designation didn't exist before she came on so my role was always very
[Guest]: operations oriented right because of my experience with reality tv i knew how to do logistics
[Guest]: so stuff like administration terrible math person but managed finance for the longest
[Guest]: time with on a with a in hindsight a very very junior team and not really really focus
[Guest]: on that as much as we should have but my role is always that my role was to make a few things
[Guest]: happen is to make sure that the ship ran work with rohit to make sure the stuff we sold
[Guest]: and that's something which he took on us on his own stuff we sold would really come through
[Guest]: and executed right i had to take care of is there enough money in the bank is there you
[Guest]: know just kind of getting people in managing their life so i've always had that role i
[Guest]: always enjoyed that having those 50 things to do over the years what also happened is
[Guest]: i kind of brought in people who took certain things off our plate and eventually once we
[Guest]: came towards and we didn't we never thought being acquired was a thing like we didn't
[Guest]: even know that existed till someone approached us many years before we even got acquired
[Guest]: and we were like okay this is something that happens we actually even worked with the team
[Guest]: and i remember the team kind of came on because in 2011 um roshan came on to be our first
[Guest]: investor and he was one person who would keep telling us these are things that will come
[Guest]: ahead for you and i feel that he's kind of great person to have had as a mentor partner
[Guest]: because he would never tell us what to do he would tell us something like this will
[Guest]: come up and i will let you guys take a choice and maybe give you a point of view from my
[Guest]: experience but i will not make your choice for you so we had him to help us out with
[Guest]: a lot of those decisions and and at some point by the time we decided to get acquired because
[Guest]: we realized that's the way to go if you want to scale the way we want to scale um and and
[Guest]: at this base at which we wanted to we then end up trying to choose networks and went
[Guest]: through that and i think post the acquisition when when we finally did get acquired in 2018
[Guest]: i was at a point when i handed over a lot of my response so i no longer had to look
[Guest]: at finance ops was pretty much out of my this thing because at some point you hand over
[Guest]: a bunch so i was left with a few things to do and i always like to have different things
[Guest]: to do and this kind of just happened the podcasting may happen kind of filled a gap of stuff i
[Guest]: wanted to because i had also gotten very comfortable i get very nervous when i'm comfortable right
[Guest]: when you sit and you feel like okay have a relaxed day most days that's when i get really
[Guest]: like i panic a little bit because i'm like i'm worried that when things are too relaxed
[Guest]: something can go wrong i'm happy when there is some stress to deal with in the 50 things
[Guest]: going on so and that's when this thing happened and then i've done i feel it's also fed back
[Guest]: very beautifully to what i do at glitch so i come back to the team i come back to clients
[Guest]: i come back with with perspectives and insights which i wouldn't have gotten if i didn't do
[Guest]: the podcast not just from the guests i get a lot from the guests i feel like every guest
[Guest]: i learn something from but i also feel like i've learned a lot about the talent out there
[Guest]: who wants to work in this space because i interact with a large part of my audience
[Guest]: also wants to work in this entire new business world and you also then get insights into
[Guest]: tools that creators use and and so i'll go back to the guys in our production team with
[Guest]: hacks which i am thinking of which they might not use like somebody used to using bigger
[Guest]: equipment something something which is very like you know which is tiny which is a youtuber
[Guest]: piece like okay where did you get this from and so like and so all of that kind of adds
[Guest]: up but my role over time have while i've played many roles like you know there are certain
[Guest]: clients i've had great relationships with and kind of built that over time there'll
[Guest]: be times when i'll pop so i've always been a person who filled gaps and gave support
[Guest]: my job is always i still consider that to be my job is just that over time we've luckily
[Guest]: had people who came into the system who said okay i'll take care of things still like we
[Guest]: have this thing called shit hitting the fan and there's only this the level to which people
[Guest]: can manage that hitting the fan has increased so when it still comes to us it's still going
[Guest]: to be a big problem to deal with but thankfully now we have a solid set of people leading
[Guest]: the organization who take care of a lot of that and so i think that's what i enjoy which
[Guest]: is why i think the creative thing happened because i suddenly go let me get my hands
[Guest]: dirty after being in a leadership role for so long what i don't want to do is to have
[Guest]: too much of a team which is why i really like it's very shoestring in terms of even the
[Guest]: guys that you work with on the varun dogi show i'm like i don't hire someone i'll work
[Guest]: with the team which is established and so i i'm very wary of falling into the trap of
[Guest]: again becoming this person who is taking care of an organized set of people like i don't
[Guest]: want to deal with hr again in parallel and then stuff i like we have a fabulous hr team
[Guest]: now thankfully take that off my plate as well so yeah so that's how my role has evolved
[Guest]: and it's um i genuinely find that it's great to work with people from this generation because
[Guest]: i feel that they have a very interesting mindset and i feel that so i'm late i'm very like
[Guest]: on the border millennial because 82 kind of just hits that line there but i feel now the
[Guest]: term purpose while people make fun of the fact that gen z has this thing purpose and
[Guest]: whatnot i feel they truly want to do stuff which kind of connects to what they really
[Guest]: believe in um and at some point we need to be able to do enough to be able to connect
[Guest]: to that and and the constant endeavor is to do that i don't think we succeed all the time
[Guest]: as a business world it's not decided i think in general but i find that so beautiful about
[Guest]: and i don't know what gen alpha is going to be like but i think gen z at least has that
[Guest]: and um and so that's one thing which really excites me i think my podcast helps me connect
[Guest]: with this group of people who i find so fascinating who i feel have a lot of the pressures every
[Guest]: generation has but also lives in a world like you said right which is a constantly everything
[Guest]: you say is on the record everything there's so much pressure there is your mental health
[Guest]: has taken a beating because of everything else and so in some way kind of giving back
[Amit Varma]: to making sure telling them the world will be okay right there are many many things to
[Amit Varma]: unpack there but i'll begin by asking a question on leadership like you've in the past quoted
[Amit Varma]: mandela talking about how a good leader should lead from the back right so how how did you
[Amit Varma]: sort of discover and evolve your leadership or your managerial style because that seems
[Amit Varma]: to be something which you have a very settled version of now which has come over a period
[Amit Varma]: of time did that come through trial and error were there moments where you had to reorient
[Guest]: yourself and so on some pieces were already set in place by the time we started glitch
[Guest]: because i also led smaller teams right so again i go back to like reality tv you're
[Guest]: dealing with the team of people that you have producers you have a camera crew production
[Guest]: team so i had some nuances of how to handle a widespread set of people roid jokes that
[Guest]: i use a lot of my troops from reality tv contestants on employees in the early years because i'm
[Guest]: like how do you deal with this person if the person's mindset is this way so i might have
[Guest]: in all honesty there is a strong possibility i could have done that but in general i've
[Guest]: always so i've never been a person who gets to what i put it i'm not angry very easily
[Guest]: that i don't get i get flustered but i try not to show it too much with a team because
[Guest]: i feel that it only seeps down and naturally try to be the person to try and find a solve
[Guest]: and move ahead have i lost my shit sometimes have i said stuff which i shouldn't have said
[Guest]: have i dealt with the situations wrong of course but i think i've learned from those
[Guest]: and over time um kind of developed a style which was um and i think it also comes back
[Guest]: to the fact that i don't necessarily want to sit in the room saying i am the center
[Guest]: of attention i never wanted to be that person i still not i think even as a creator now
[Guest]: i'm not putting out videos which say okay this is what my quote is this is what i have
[Guest]: said that i am literally trying to share as much of the people i talk to rather than what
[Guest]: i say and i think there's there's so much in that and i feel that i did that as in glitch
[Guest]: as well is that i would have come in there i've got a great bunch of people together
[Guest]: how do i help them do what they do want to do by with taking off all the headaches if
[Guest]: they have um you know it could be you know at some point companies become bureaucratic
[Guest]: we we so have we we have many parts which are bureaucratic at some point there are stuff
[Guest]: which like you know like like reading a contract or looking at you know there are those things
[Guest]: which are not exciting for a larger part of the people you hire so i would take care of
[Guest]: those um by instinct of saying okay let them do what they're doing um i can take care of
[Guest]: these once in a while i'll get a project which i'm really kicked apart and i would do that
[Guest]: um and and and so on and so forth so i think my style evolved because um i naturally gravitate
[Guest]: towards logistics i enjoy it i'm actually very unstructured but i still enjoy logistics
[Guest]: and i that's why i took to production so well because production in india is a very unstructured
[Guest]: business it's very it's like the wild west so that's how my leaderships i've evolved
[Guest]: and at some point also because i kept a certain distance um and i learned that from my mtv
[Guest]: days and from my channel v days that the more distance you keep with not like being cold
[Guest]: but like there needs to be a line so um i wouldn't like even when i had like my first
[Guest]: assistant producer i would take care of that person like he was like almost like a kid
[Guest]: i would take care of right but i would still make that the relation i was still not your
[Guest]: friend in the normal sense i'm still that person you can turn to when you need help
[Guest]: i also became this person because of the people i learned from you know the producers i had
[Guest]: back at mtv back at channel v who i learned good and bad from i learned how you should
[Guest]: not be uh whenever i've seen someone try to make them the center of it it becomes a problem
[Guest]: whereas you're always a facilitator i think we need a good producer and i still say i'm
[Guest]: a good producer because you're a facilitator you're not the director you're not the script
[Guest]: writer you're not the dop you're not the actor you have to make sure the ship runs and and
[Guest]: reaches its destination so i just took that mindset of me being a producer and put it
[Guest]: into me uh being an entrepreneur and that's always worked out let's move on to i think
[Amit Varma]: another of sort of the big changes that we've seen in the last decade and a half you spoke
[Amit Varma]: earlier of about how uh you know tech has changed so much and uh you know one realization
[Amit Varma]: of this was you know i think back in 2016 these guys from the u.s got in touch with
[Amit Varma]: me and said would i do a youtube series for them and would i kind of make some videos
[Amit Varma]: where i'm talking about concepts for three minutes and whatever and i scripted it and
[Amit Varma]: they said i will pay x amount for the production which was decent enough why don't you get
[Amit Varma]: someone to produce it so i reached out to a contemporary of mine who had also done the
[Amit Varma]: mtv channel v thing and you might even know him david polycarp yeah and yeah so david
[Amit Varma]: is a very dear friend so david very kindly said don't worry i will take care of everything
[Amit Varma]: and he got a like a 20 person crew to my house and they moved bookshelves around and hazar
[Amit Varma]: production went into it and i was at that time just thinking in my head that oh okay
[Amit Varma]: my imagination was that a guy will come with one camera and one lapel mic and it'll just
[Amit Varma]: kind of happen and there is this massive kind of crew and uh you know recently i've also
[Amit Varma]: been thinking of experimenting with youtube and all of that uh building my own setup researching
[Amit Varma]: that and the thing is that it is incredibly simple like even for podcasting you know like
[Amit Varma]: what i'm doing now i mean i'm basically producing my own show and i can get near studio quality
[Amit Varma]: output you know with really basic budget equipment uh what 20 years ago would have you know been
[Amit Varma]: a full production involving so much and probably beyond the reach of one person but today you
[Amit Varma]: can sit in your room and uh you know just kind of uh get it done and this is something
[Amit Varma]: that i think sort of older people perhaps of my generation haven't quite fully come
[Amit Varma]: to terms with but younger creators have immediately figured it out because they are native to
[Amit Varma]: this they're consuming this stuff all the time they're much more comfortable with technology
[Amit Varma]: and so on how has the transition been for you because in a sense you started off in
[Amit Varma]: the old world where uh you are using all those i presume those big ass cameras and whatever
[Amit Varma]: but at the same time like you mentioned you're fortunate enough to be in a place where the
[Amit Varma]: workflows are not that dogmatic where you're constantly doing jugar sugar and you know
[Amit Varma]: getting um doing things very fast which is very much sort of the youtube ethic in a sense
[Amit Varma]: just get it done get it done just keep doing throw things at the wall uh what was that
[Amit Varma]: sort of process uh for you like and is that stuff that the agency is also internalized
[Amit Varma]: in the work you do like you said that you pick up tips from creators and you'll pass
[Amit Varma]: it along to them so you know how has that impacted your workflows for example like you
[Guest]: know what's the workflow of the varun dogi show the workflow the varun dogi show is pretty
[Guest]: simple actually so i go through this period of experimentation where i will in sometimes
[Guest]: spend unnecessary money on on random things and eventually come with a simple solution
[Guest]: so i wanted my for instance video to be slightly better than regular zoom quality so i bought
[Guest]: a webcam eventually which worked great because it got me i'm like okay youtube is 1080 you
[Guest]: don't need a 4k camera got a webcam for 3000 rupees that took care of that so for me that
[Guest]: was great took care of one entire piece because every time i went to another platform and
[Guest]: i've tried many there was some problem i've always faced in the video part of it the audio
[Guest]: parts have always been great so i've still stuck to using zoom in most cases but my workflow
[Guest]: is pretty simple i have like i have a bunch of people i've kind of working with now um
[Guest]: from this company called the small business project that rachit and his team are fabulous
[Guest]: and i've known rachit for a bit and and what i've actually done with them is to kind of
[Guest]: work with them and say i tell rachit okay i i'm going to give you x y and z i need to
[Guest]: take care of other pieces for me and we figured a workflow and and and also kind of find people
[Guest]: who you will meet right so some of the like some of the guys who work on the audio are
[Guest]: like x ibm who kind of going so we're going to plug in and they're helping on that front
[Guest]: find somebody else who's just reached out and said okay i'm pulling out insights from
[Guest]: episodes and someone wants to send me chapters right so you know you don't do timestamps
[Guest]: on an episode someone was nice enough to email me saying these are the timestamps for your
[Guest]: episode and i said okay do you want to do this all the time i can make it a paid gig
[Guest]: so it's i think some of those things have organically evolved and if we've putting together
[Guest]: a team of people who are naturally proactive and doing stuff and we're finding a flow um
[Guest]: my recording style is pretty straightforward um i actually you know one of the first things
[Guest]: you said is that i don't do prep prep which i always say my prep is not traditional prep
[Guest]: i do a 15 minute pre-chat with my guests a week before at least or whenever i can get
[Guest]: a slot so in that i scribble a few things on my ipad and that is my frame of reference
[Guest]: in some cases their pr teams or whoever will send me some stuff which i generally don't
[Guest]: necessarily follow but i do find a few pieces there as nuggets which i find interesting
[Guest]: so i put them down there and then i let it flow that because a lot of my audience also
[Guest]: i mean at least on advertising is dead is a lot more corporate so i get a lot more info
[Guest]: there on the varunduki show for me i call it improv podcasting because i feel it's interesting
[Guest]: kind of bring someone in and have a regular conversation um and let it evolve where it
[Guest]: does and that's what i've been doing i've been i've been trying to find as widespread
[Guest]: a set of guests as i can and just have a chat about stuff i'd want to really talk to them
[Guest]: about and and what are you looking at this as being okay this is like a show that's focused
[Guest]: on x and y and z it's like you learn so much from conversation so that's how i'm looking
[Guest]: at that uh but going back to the other part about what i've learned as as actual hacks
[Guest]: and tools and creation what's been interesting is it's it's been an interesting three-way
[Guest]: street where i know the people in our team as well who'll follow some of those youtube
[Guest]: channels like for instance a large part of what we do is product so how do you shoot
[Guest]: a product was traditionally very complex but still is complex process just to make it look
[Guest]: the way you know you some of those things you need that texture you need you know those
[Guest]: all of that stuff and that's a very complicated process it's very expensive to do but there's
[Guest]: so many of these youtubers who have these hacks so i for instance follow a few of them
[Guest]: and i keep sending those videos we have a few of those groups between people in the
[Guest]: office right on one on instagram one on whatsapp and we'll all keep sending stuff across and
[Guest]: and those range from someone's television commercial to someone's behind the scenes
[Guest]: video of a youtube product shoot and and somewhere in between we've found things we will adopt
[Guest]: so we do a lot of product stuff that looks instagram worthy might not be at the same
[Guest]: high endness of what is traditionally a product shot for an ad but it's great for instagram
[Guest]: it's great for e-commerce so also makes it seem like it's content which you normally
[Guest]: scroll past so we build that out and a lot of the techniques we use to create that is
[Guest]: what youtubers use and so i love when that happens right and when that's happening and
[Guest]: when someone reaches out simply you use something right what do you use as equipment so i think
[Guest]: this is what it is so there's times when i've actually sent across stuff which i have bought
[Guest]: as random small equipment and said try and use this so i remember when we were doing
[Guest]: stuff at fashion week or like me you know there's a thing where you need to switch your
[Guest]: mindset where you would shoot something on a larger camera move it to an edit machine
[Guest]: edit it and upload it online when it had to be as live as possible we started shooting
[Guest]: on an iphone so every year the glitch office would have a brand new set of iphones come
[Guest]: in and the old set sold off best investment ever because through the year whenever you
[Guest]: had to go to smaller events etc these phones have fabulous cameras i shoot so i'm starting
[Guest]: to work on a few vlog like or straight up content like pieces for youtube i had a gopro
[Guest]: i tried to use some other camera i eventually came down to using my iphone i'm like once
[Guest]: this is a great camera figured a way to you know get the right kind of tripod and i use
[Guest]: like i bought a light and all that stuff but a lot of these techniques when i look at how
[Guest]: people are shooting like when you mentioned the crew kind of coming in 20 people now those
[Guest]: shoots and also thanks to how shoots happened last year have become that tiny you literally
[Guest]: have two people come in i had to shoot something for a workshop piece i was doing one guy came
[Guest]: with one camera put the mic in and and had no light because he said can we just shoot
[Guest]: in the day so i feel like finally come into that point of getting as many people as required
[Guest]: in india we have too many people on a set it's a problem we great in giving employment
[Guest]: it's a it's fabulous right you will have one guy walking around giving people bislerika
[Guest]: uh bottles to drink water on a set right traditionally you go abroad someone goes and takes their
[Guest]: own water they'll have a guy to pick up two boxes you'll have one more guy so for everything
[Guest]: there is somebody's job which is which is great in a larger context but also makes it
[Guest]: a very crowded space and makes it very noisy whereas like and i think we finally come to
[Guest]: that point it's i mean obviously we have to figure how all those people are going to survive
[Guest]: what they're going to do and and they've all and some of those things have gone back to
[Guest]: normal right shoots in many of those cases still happen the same but we finally realizing
[Guest]: especially from youtubers that this stuff can be shot this way you don't necessarily
[Guest]: need 50 people for everything you can do it with five people it's just that we never tried
[Guest]: to do it because we thought it's simpler and more relaxed to have one person to do every
[Guest]: single thing and and that nuance is fabulous now and most creators like i don't know want
[Guest]: all this just give me a phone and i'll go shoot that the way they shoot is interesting
[Guest]: i've learned so much from that they believe in archiving which is fabulous because they'll
[Guest]: see something random they'll shoot it they'll store it in their phone and they'll use it
[Guest]: at a later date it's just there in their stock of videos which we would never think of as
[Amit Varma]: stock footage yeah i mean you get into the habit of you should be roll all the time and
[Amit Varma]: you never know when you kind of might use it so tell me about you know you're so beginning
[Amit Varma]: to explore the creator ecosystem like first of all you know when do you start thinking
[Amit Varma]: of yourself as a creator in this sense is it when you start doing advertising is dead
[Amit Varma]: or is it some way kind of into that you know on your newsletter as well you shared plenty
[Amit Varma]: of insights about sort of the creator ecosystem you've spoken about how do you build frameworks
[Amit Varma]: you've spoken about what you call the intimate content ecosystem take me through a you know
[Amit Varma]: your personal narrative of how you begin to think of yourself as a creator and then about
[Amit Varma]: how you begin to set up those processes by which you kind of create and how that conception
[Amit Varma]: of yourself is evolving to begin with before we actually get down to what the ecosystem
[Guest]: is like so i think i truly became a creator in my head while i've always dabbled in these
[Guest]: things since i started the podcast i think by the time i hit like 75 80 episodes of advertising
[Guest]: is dead i'm like once again this is actually a thing right because i think for the first
[Guest]: 50 i was still figuring out what i was like i it a took me a while to even think about
[Guest]: the fact that i was a podcast host because i used to always mumble as a kid and through
[Guest]: college so i was never clear like i would be in meetings and i'd be told talk slower
[Guest]: people aren't getting what you're saying and to go from that to me doing this as like almost
[Guest]: something which i do almost as half my job and i'd say that in the nicest way possible
[Guest]: and it has been an interesting transition for my own headspace and i feel that i've
[Guest]: become a lot more confident about the things i'll be able to do i've always had confidence
[Guest]: it's grown over the years since my days in bangalore and everything else but i've truly
[Guest]: been able to okay i can actually do this happened around 75 episodes around 50 i was happy around
[Guest]: 75 like on what next so i remember that when if when i finished 50 episodes i made this
[Guest]: note down saying notes post 50 and i one of the things okay what are the things i need
[Guest]: to now work on because till then it was about let's get the show in that's when i really
[Guest]: start look at my programming a lot more you know but how do i make the variance of my
[Guest]: guests interesting how do i look at what's happening around the show in that sense one
[Guest]: day someone told me that why is your instagram account so boring i'm like what do you mean
[Guest]: i say if you go to it all you see are teal and yellow posts because i wasn't posting
[Guest]: anything except for the episode creative every week i said people want more from you around
[Guest]: the show i'm like it seems like a lot of work and so i tried and i would then i started
[Guest]: sharing random stuff it wasn't there was no plan something i'd find interesting i would
[Guest]: share i was still not i think i became a creator fully in full fledgedness at when lockdown
[Guest]: happened because i was suddenly at home i had bought a mic because i wanted to dabble
[Guest]: in recording some stuff myself and also because i said sometimes you might need some patchwork
[Guest]: i didn't want to travel all the way back to the ibm studio to do it um let me just buy
[Guest]: a mic so i bought a usb mic and it was there and when i started to create this i started
[Guest]: enjoying all the smaller pieces right because sometimes when you're in a studio you you
[Guest]: miss all the other stuff you could do around it and you and i think the first couple of
[Guest]: months of lockdown is because there wasn't much you could do work also wasn't as hectic
[Guest]: for a lot of us because there was not as much happening on many fronts so that's when useless
[Guest]: information happened because i want to just not just talk about advertising and marketing
[Guest]: right now the world's in this space i want to talk about something that is utterly random
[Guest]: which is why useless happened i was like this is going to be the like you need to have that
[Guest]: one hour of irreverence of any random conversation and this is what that show is and the more
[Guest]: i did it then i started looking at how other people post um i started looking at how to
[Guest]: create and slowly but surely i started enjoying many elements of it i also realized it doesn't
[Guest]: have to be that complicated i feel that that baggage you take from having short stuff and
[Guest]: create stuff with all that stuff around makes you not want to do it whereas i feel that
[Guest]: that's what the difference between generations is that people now were born with a phone
[Guest]: which they could create with whereas when cell phones came into our lives a little later
[Guest]: in life right and and and then the cameras and everything else so i discovered that in
[Guest]: 2020 i think 2019 i was still dabbling and and i wasn't committing to it i've had friends
[Guest]: who in the space said okay why don't you do more with this um and that you need to decide
[Guest]: if this is a hobby or if this is something you're doing seriously even me being a podcast
[Guest]: host right so i said sometime you're giving so much time and effort and money uh money
[Guest]: as being just like the time i spend on it is it going somewhere or just doing it for
[Guest]: fun so decide that and plan it that way and i have a few of these friends who will always
[Guest]: put these points in my ear and whenever i'm just because i tend to get into a flow enjoy
[Guest]: the flow and not to think about how this could be in the future and i have a few of them
[Guest]: including puja who will sit me down and say think about why you're doing this and think
[Guest]: about and put that down and then move with that and that's what i've been doing but uh
[Guest]: yeah i'm just enjoying sharing more and more i found new formats i've um instagram was
[Guest]: something i started to do a lot more in 2020 then i started looking at the kind of content
[Guest]: i want to share so i start sharing stuff about books because um i've been terrible at remembering
[Guest]: pieces of books um i find it fascinating that you remember so many of these things but i
[Guest]: sometimes i don't remember anything so i found an app called readvise and readvise has been
[Guest]: fabulous for me because everything i would bookmark on my kindle would show up there
[Guest]: and i'm like and i'd keep going back to it give me like a few things every day or something
[Guest]: i bookmarked or something which i marked up and so i started just sharing that and that
[Guest]: started to be something people really enjoyed my workout videos have were a random thing
[Guest]: i just started to do because it's a large part of how i've been able to push i need
[Guest]: to find that one piece to anchor my day which gives me like it's my form of meditation right
[Guest]: that one what 45 minutes to one hour i work out every day and i work out every single
[Guest]: day i took a week off started again uh when we're recording this and it's been one of
[Guest]: those things so i just started to share a bunch of these things gone back to my love
[Guest]: for formats so trying a live format try twitter spaces out try a newsletter all of these things
[Guest]: have come from single well let's just try this out maybe i'll enjoy doing it and and
[Guest]: also some from time to time pull back as well pull back and say okay you're doing too much
[Guest]: now think about all the stuff you want to do and don't want to do and um and i and recalibrate
[Guest]: as well i'm gonna come back so that's been my creative journey it's been about what do
[Guest]: i want to share with the world which i feel they'll get some value from which i also enjoy
[Guest]: doing while i'm sharing it um and i'm realized i have a lot of those and i still have many
[Guest]: more which i still want to work on and share um and so that's what's keeping me going as
[Amit Varma]: in this whole creator mindset of mine so i'm kind of going to ramble a bit uh and also
[Amit Varma]: give my gentle disagreement with something you said in one of your posts but first a
[Amit Varma]: ramble which is that you know when i was teaching a podcasting course and and people would ask
[Amit Varma]: you know what should i make a podcast about or where are the gaps in the market and blah
[Amit Varma]: blah blah and i would always say that listen you know everything's been done every idea
[Amit Varma]: is out there every format is out there there's nothing new even if you find a gap in the
[Amit Varma]: market 50 other people will the only thing that makes your show unique is you so you
[Amit Varma]: have to be authentic to yourself and in a sense that's also how i defined uh the scene
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen is that this is a show that is documenting my intellectual curiosity i
[Amit Varma]: speak i have conversations with people i want to have conversations with and like you correctly
[Amit Varma]: said you know you have something to learn from everybody every single person on this
[Amit Varma]: planet knows something that you don't so if you have the opportunity to have a conversation
[Amit Varma]: and learn some of that that's incredible now as you were speaking it struck me that you
[Amit Varma]: know everything else that you're doing whether it is sharing the things that you found interesting
[Amit Varma]: in the books you read or whether it is your workout videos and so on also feeds into that
[Amit Varma]: same thing it feeds into authenticity and who you are which is what will ultimately
[Amit Varma]: uh draw someone you know tomorrow if i announced that hey the scene in the unseen i'm taking
[Amit Varma]: a break someone else will do the interviews it's not the same show anymore it's completely
[Amit Varma]: different right and ditto with advertising is dead or in fact any good show done by anybody
[Amit Varma]: uh in fact one of my editors who have shared with ivm uh till now was one day telling me
[Amit Varma]: how it's fascinating to him that the same guest will come on my show and your show and
[Amit Varma]: say kartik show and it'll be a completely different conversation which is one of the
[Amit Varma]: delights of it and the gentle disagreement is because i think at some point you were
[Amit Varma]: speaking about what you should keep in mind when you're starting a podcast and i think
[Amit Varma]: the second of your questions if i remember correctly was why you you know what do you
[Amit Varma]: have that is special that is whatever and i think in a sense that is the wrong question
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that one everyone is a sort of you know unique in the way and secondly even
[Amit Varma]: if you're not an expert in something the point is that you are on a journey which many other
[Amit Varma]: people are on at different stages perhaps so there is value in your sharing that part
[Amit Varma]: of it anymore so someone who is for example watching one of your workout videos uh might
[Amit Varma]: aspire to work out like that might be a person who works out himself and is looking at hey
[Amit Varma]: how someone else does it a fellow traveler does it so to say i would imagine that people
[Amit Varma]: who listen to our respective podcasts have thought about many of these things are interested
[Amit Varma]: in some of these things it doesn't matter if we per se as hosts are not special it is
[Amit Varma]: our you know sort of journey that we uh share and to that extent it seems that a lot of
[Amit Varma]: what makes creators stand out is that element of being true to themselves like when blogs
[Amit Varma]: came about people used to disparagingly say of blogs that hey who wants to know what you
[Amit Varma]: had for breakfast and i'm like no actually you know in a sense many people want to know
[Amit Varma]: what you had for breakfast what are your sort of thoughts on this so i want to clarify that
[Guest]: the point you disagree on right is that so why i said that why you is because if you
[Guest]: are not convinced as to why are you the person to do this you will not stick on to this for
[Guest]: too long right because i feel a lot of people start a podcast saying oh i want to do it
[Guest]: because somebody else is doing it or somebody else is doing this um that authentic part
[Guest]: you spoke about is exactly the reasoning and i agree because it's a journey right like
[Guest]: i do this 25 episode thing every 25 episode sit down and say why am i doing this like
[Guest]: i revisit that saying why am i that which is why at some point i said okay i can't only
[Guest]: talk advertising and marketing let me talk about business as well for advertising is
[Guest]: dead the varun dooky show happened because i'm interested in personal development i'm
[Guest]: interested in in workflows and everything else and and productivity as such and so all
[Guest]: of that is how that happened but what i feel is interesting about the guests and the voice
[Guest]: is that i agree with you podcast for me the biggest revelation has been is that it's such
[Guest]: a simple medium in that its voice and its conversation it is the kind which we do but
[Guest]: it's also so liberating because you're not constrained by studio set lights which is
[Guest]: what a lot of us get constrained by in video which i know that youtubers and real makers
[Guest]: will disagree with me because they don't necessarily have any constraints as well but i feel it's
[Guest]: a medium where you can actually go deeper into things and really get insights as you
[Guest]: personally want to get out and people will find insights from that and what's also kind
[Guest]: of interesting is that i've had my own journey in the way i speak on the podcast over the
[Guest]: last two and a half years because i feel that i've evolved i've evolved my learning i've
[Guest]: evolved with the kind of guests i want to bring on kind of conversations i want to have
[Guest]: because also at some point i agree with you that people come in for the host a lot more
[Guest]: than the guests because they want the host's way of having a conversation the way of digging
[Guest]: into what the matter of that episode is subject matter of the episode is is what interests
[Guest]: them because they relate to that right it's like so i speak to some people about some
[Guest]: of the most popular podcasts globally right there are many people who don't like masters
[Guest]: of scale i kind of agree with them in some context because i find reid hoffman to be
[Guest]: great in some conversations not so great in many i feel he uses sound design to cover
[Guest]: up for for many of his own issues maybe in the way he does it similarly for i remember
[Guest]: listening to this podcast called inside voices which has been my find of last year and inside
[Guest]: voices was a podcast where the conversations are only with podcast hosts i forget the name
[Guest]: of the host or the podcast but he says that what does your voice sound like and i found
[Guest]: that to be such an interesting question because it has two and he takes it in both the angles
[Guest]: that what do you think it sounds like yet what does it really stand for in terms of
[Guest]: what it sounds like and he takes both those contexts and i found it and that podcast for
[Guest]: me made me think so much about who i am and what my own voice was and that's actually
[Guest]: when i built this framework out of of thinking about how to make a podcast and and i realized
[Guest]: that frameworks were a thing as the deeper i went into the productivity youtube rabbit
[Guest]: hole but i mean that that podcast taught me a lot i i remember went back to some there's
[Guest]: a podcast host called mad golly mad golly does what eight podcasts and last count which
[Guest]: i've i've seen and i was like how does someone do eight podcasts right i think even he's
[Guest]: also on conan's podcast if i remember right i'm not sure entirely and so his thing was
[Guest]: interesting right because his thing was the curiosity of the different realms he has of
[Guest]: interest and how he works on it was intriguing to me so there is so much there to unpack
[Guest]: that at some point you're kind of sitting and you're learning and you're reveling in
[Guest]: it and you're letting it flow you're hoping people are along for the ride and you're hoping
[Guest]: that they learn something from it and you'll also very easily know people don't like it
[Guest]: i mean i've once in a while and i've tried something slightly different someone will
[Guest]: write in and say okay i didn't like this and you learn from that not necessarily follow
[Amit Varma]: it but you'll also learn from it fascinating and tell me about frameworks now like you
[Amit Varma]: know in your newsletter in the november 7th edition to be precise you spoke about three
[Amit Varma]: ways to build a framework which i found very relatable because that's almost exactly what
[Amit Varma]: i try to do not necessarily what i do always and i feel that you know building a framework
[Amit Varma]: around something that you're doing helps in two ways one it helps clarify exactly what
[Amit Varma]: you're doing and sometimes why and two then it makes the process much easier then it's
[Amit Varma]: not a mishmash of stuff that you have to somehow get through there's just an easy way you're
[Amit Varma]: sitting down and you're kind of getting the job done it takes those sort of mechanical
[Amit Varma]: elements out of the way tell me a bit about how you're thinking of frameworks evolved
[Amit Varma]: and how you developed your own workflows and and what are these three ways so i actually
[Guest]: got into frameworks very recently i never knew the term framework was the right term
[Guest]: to use for a lot of stuff so sometimes when someone would ask me to plan something i think
[Guest]: formats were my version of frameworks i know that that's a term i've used a lot through
[Guest]: this episode um and and at some point when i would do any form of work i try to come
[Guest]: with my own system to do it my own reasoning as to why it has to be a certain way um and
[Guest]: there are few youtubers who have actually learned a bunch of stuff um casey neistat
[Guest]: has been one of my long-time like favorites for just like the process of what he did but
[Guest]: i knew that i love his episodes where he he draws stuff out with the marker on paper to
[Guest]: show how stuff happens i discovered matt diavola at some point and made a well as deep into
[Guest]: productivity and and everything else and very like again i learned some there is one youtuber
[Guest]: who um his name is nathaniel drew and i discovered him sometime i think uh late 2019 and i found
[Guest]: his story fascinating the young guy uh from i forget where in america who's who's learns
[Guest]: languages who travels the world and the way he even shoots the way he narrates is so classical
[Guest]: but he goes back into um he builds out frameworks for his own life and just like talks about
[Guest]: that so at some point as i start putting those down and i came up and i came across the term
[Guest]: framework i saw okay one second there are things you do in life and i feel that the
[Guest]: reason why the only way you can do more in your day and yet be healthy get enough rest
[Guest]: etc is if you build routine into your life i think routine is the framework for life
[Guest]: so for me my process in the morning in many ways is templatized like it's it's a standard
[Guest]: flow i will i will do x y and z right after each other and that's my framework for my
[Guest]: morning very rarely gets altered unless i'm traveling or something else is up um and i
[Guest]: feel that as you build those things out you then can bring them into every single thing
[Guest]: every single thing you do can be brought down to a framework because every framework is
[Guest]: also adaptable it's not rigid in my mind it is fluid and that's how i came across it and
[Guest]: then i started reading more and more about frameworks and trying to see what people have
[Guest]: used and i get more ideas from that right so i sometimes try to adapt a framework sometimes
[Guest]: i try to use literally sometimes i try to come up with one in many cases what i come
[Guest]: up with so my newsletter sometimes i experiment some of the frameworks i have put across which
[Guest]: i have come up with are experiments or frameworks i came up with while i was writing that newsletter
[Guest]: it's not like i've thought about before when i'm thinking about a certain topic i'm like
[Guest]: what could the structure for this be what could the format for this be and i came up
[Guest]: with it and i put it down i have also had some very badly written frameworks which when
[Guest]: i read it after i write it i'm like this doesn't work so i'll scrap it and i'll write something
[Guest]: else but that's i think i think i love that but it's that i think that love for formats
[Guest]: has now come into this and it's just made me think about like the other day i was talking
[Guest]: to a friend of mine name is munjal kapadia right he also does a podcast he's also our
[Guest]: doc we had leah with him and i was like is there a framework for being a dad and because
[Guest]: he and i talk a lot about being fathers because i think we we are modern fathers of this generation
[Guest]: are so different from how dads were like my dad was a certain way he and i have a fabulous
[Guest]: relationship but i think that a lot of what is part of my role as a father involves being
[Guest]: a lot more hands-on than it ever was for anybody before me and and i enjoy so much of that
[Guest]: right um and so i said is there a framework for that and because i feel that everything
[Guest]: in life can be drilled down to a framework but that framework might not necessarily work
[Guest]: for everyone it could work for some not work for the others and the more i put it down
[Guest]: at least in my head for a person who's so unstructured it helps me bring some sort of
[Guest]: structure into my own mind and i feel that's why frameworks are important especially for
[Amit Varma]: unstructured to kind of keep putting down so is there a framework for being a dad what's
[Guest]: your framework my framework for being a dad is a few things um i don't i haven't put it
[Guest]: on paper but i feel that to be a dad you need to be the balance of a person who has enough
[Guest]: time and a set of interests so i fell over the quadrant right with me and leah there
[Guest]: are things which only she and i do together so it's that one part that's only her and
[Guest]: my thing to do um and there'll be small things for the longest time it was me just taking
[Guest]: her to the loo when she had to do number two right it was our thing that dad takes me that
[Guest]: papa takes me to do that like mom doesn't take honey doesn't take um unless i was in
[Guest]: a meeting or whatever or it could be the fact that there's this book i read for very often
[Guest]: of recent times i'm trying to get her into star wars because she is named leah and it's
[Guest]: very little princess but how i read it is that i don't read it literally we look at
[Guest]: what's happening in each page and i come up with stories i want to teach her how to imagine
[Guest]: it being having an imagination has helped me through life in boring classrooms in boring
[Guest]: meetings in at times when i was just generally bored or didn't have anything to do or just
[Guest]: kind of imagine what life could be like um find your happy place and things like that
[Guest]: so so some of those things are stuff that she and i do together i'm also the person
[Guest]: who who in her life will be the most i think strict is a bad word but she knows that when
[Guest]: i call something as a line i give her a reason and i and she she knows that i will not flinch
[Guest]: from that if i if with that reason right so everybody's surprised that i would be the
[Guest]: strictest person with her because i'm not that person at all in with anybody else um
[Guest]: but i feel that you need to have one there's a line between being a parent and being a
[Guest]: friend i don't necessarily want to need to be her friend but i need to be her parent
[Guest]: and i feel that that's a distinction so while the stuff we do together there is stuff which
[Guest]: are things that she knows i will have a say on and then beyond that is the fact that i'll
[Guest]: always have time for her for stuff that's important for her so she has a twice a week
[Guest]: skating class so i'm making this up while i'm talking to you but if i had to put on
[Guest]: this i feel that as dads you miss a lot of things in the past when i look at for many
[Guest]: people's fathers my my my dad had had to miss stuff because he's a doctor i have a case
[Guest]: you can't come uh if it's sports day and then stuff i understand all of those things but
[Guest]: for me it's very important that there's some things that are part of leia's life which
[Guest]: i know really important to her which if i am not a part of that's me not doing what
[Guest]: i have to do as a father so stuff that we do together stuff that's important to her
[Guest]: and then stuff that's important to me rather which is what the stuff i'm strict on saying
[Guest]: okay you need to like i want her to learn to take her own shoes and put them in the
[Guest]: shoe rack not leave them around it's a small thing but i think it teaches you to keep things
[Guest]: in their own place and keep them organized or rather keep them how do i put it i have
[Guest]: a thing about not letting things get spoiled because you don't take care of them like i
[Guest]: still have a lot of my toys from when i was a kid because i took care of them um they're
[Guest]: now with her and i'm trying to make sure she doesn't spoil them so some of those gijos
[Guest]: have landed up with her now and so i said that it's it's the triangle of those three
[Guest]: things is what being a dad is and and you're just around for the ride i feel that fathers
[Guest]: and daughters and fathers and uh and their kids have a very interesting relationship
[Guest]: but it doesn't have to be a disjointed relationship and i don't have a disjointed one with my
[Amit Varma]: father and i don't want her to have one with us how much does conscious thinking about
[Amit Varma]: frameworks affect whatever the framework is a framework of for example uh you know in
[Amit Varma]: that episode of advertising is dead with puja she speaks about how you guys have a relationship
[Amit Varma]: which is almost not like a conventional couple you look at it more as a partnership and uh
[Amit Varma]: you know obviously you're very good friends and all of that and i think you also spoke
[Amit Varma]: in that or one of you spoke in that about how in the early parts of the marriage it
[Amit Varma]: was a kind of most standard and then it evolved to becoming this so do you think that at and
[Amit Varma]: we all all our relationships are kind of in a sense driven by inertia that it falls into
[Amit Varma]: a particular groove and then it stays in that groove unless it is forced out of that group
[Amit Varma]: by an external event so do you think there is something to be gained from all of us in
[Amit Varma]: just sitting back and reconsidering the things that we take for granted and the grooves that
[Amit Varma]: are running and thinking of what is the framework here and is that the right framework what
[Amit Varma]: should be the framework here because a change in framework it seems to me can be profound
[Amit Varma]: it can affect you know not just both people but everyone around them like a very charming
[Amit Varma]: picture of your daughter that i saw on puja's instagram page was where she's cooking something
[Amit Varma]: and she's sitting on the platform itself and she's making some bread and cheese or whatever
[Amit Varma]: and a lovely photograph of course but it also strikes me that you know almost sort of a
[Amit Varma]: symbolic image of what you'd expect a young girl to be when both her parents are strong
[Amit Varma]: independent professionals and you know relate to each other with a certain kind of respect
[Amit Varma]: and not you know which many frameworks of traditional indian marriages actually don't
[Amit Varma]: have even within privileged households so do you think there is something to be said
[Amit Varma]: about figuring out the framework for everything that one does i feel it's all about balance
[Guest]: right it's about so what uja and i found over the years that we've been married is that
[Guest]: there are certain things that are important to me certain things important to her and
[Guest]: there's something which bother each of us about each other and in the same way it goes
[Guest]: it goes with layer it goes with anything else and and there are some things you can work
[Guest]: on some things you can't it could be as simple as i'm a person who when he's sitting keeps
[Guest]: shaking his leg i have that i have that nervous tick of you know that person who shakes his
[Guest]: leg it irritates the hell out of puja i have still not been able to do sort that out in
[Guest]: all the years we married it's been over like what eight odd years that we've been married
[Guest]: but i know for a fact that she knows that i i like my things a certain way so for me
[Guest]: my morning time when i brew my coffee and i go do my business are very important my
[Guest]: my my mood for the day gravitates around me doing my business in the morning and i feel
[Guest]: that's i'm putting it as nicely and less graphic as possible um whereas puja likes the house
[Guest]: arranged in a way that it's lovely to look at and so when i before i go to bed i make
[Guest]: sure stuff is put in its place it's my thing to do um i would not have done that before
[Guest]: we were married i would just leave things as they are but i know it's important to her
[Guest]: and i don't mind doing it i i i'm a person who enjoys washing dishes i find it it lets
[Guest]: me zone out of the world and it's weirdly therapeutic in some cases so early lockdown
[Guest]: was not a problem so the way i look at it but i think you find those pieces and the
[Guest]: more you find those pieces you also then figure out what those grooves are that you spoke
[Guest]: of right sometimes you find something you know neither of you will want to budge from
[Guest]: and then you need to have that conversation to find that new groove that kind of comes
[Guest]: in because and that's what early periods of any relationship are that you're trying to
[Guest]: find those what are the non-negotiables what are the negotiables and the non-negotiables
[Guest]: i feel in most cases you either come to terms with but if you don't that's just going to
[Guest]: be stuff that sticks for a long time and create issues we've luckily found very few non-negotiables
[Guest]: um where one of us is going to come to terms with it um and i think that's how you evolve
[Guest]: it so it is in a way a framework but i feel it's something that also evolves with how
[Guest]: we evolve as people like when i met puja and she made me i feel we were also very different
[Guest]: people than we are now eight years later we were both grown so it's still an evolving
[Guest]: piece what could be like i was not as ambitious a person as i am now when she met me even
[Guest]: though i was an entrepreneur and i had glitch going on and everything else i'm a lot more
[Guest]: ambitious now because i suddenly see there's so much more i could do with what i've been
[Guest]: able to build and do in life um and and similarly for when i look at her i've always seen puja
[Guest]: as uh as a certain way with her career but i'm seeing the stuff she's doing just like
[Guest]: beyond the workplace and the stuff she's focused on from a purpose standpoint etc which were
[Guest]: always there but i feel that she's found that voice so i feel that we evolve as people so
[Guest]: you evolve those grooves and those frameworks as well but it's also it's conversation um
[Guest]: it's important in any relationship to not let and i believe that the biggest the biggest
[Guest]: problems in the world can be solved by a conversation and i feel that we don't have conversations
[Guest]: where you're trying to listen to the other person i think conversations are a lot people
[Guest]: think it's a lot more about speaking i think as a podcast host you realize it's a lot more
[Guest]: about listening um than it is about speaking and and i feel that we don't listen enough
[Guest]: but in any relation as long as you listen enough you find some nuance to what the other
[Guest]: person's point of view is and you work around it and as long as you do that you'll figure
[Guest]: a way to evolve it into and to make it work well like you correctly said you know one
[Amit Varma]: of the things you learn as a podcaster if you're paying attention is how much you need
[Amit Varma]: to listen like you know steven covey once said that we don't listen to uh understand
[Amit Varma]: we listen to respond which is a really bad habit that you actually and and i think you
[Amit Varma]: know and this is something i discussed with the great podcaster russ roberts when he was
[Amit Varma]: on my show is about how there is actually a moral component to having a good conversation
[Amit Varma]: and to actually listening like you know emmanuel kahn famously spoke of the categorical imperative
[Amit Varma]: that you don't want to treat you know another human being as a means to an end but as an
[Amit Varma]: end in themselves and very often when we are in conversation we are doing exactly that
[Amit Varma]: we are treating other people as a means to an end either we want to show off how smart
[Amit Varma]: we are so you'll find you know hosts interrupting all the time and you know just to do one-upmanship
[Amit Varma]: or looking for gotcha moments and all of that which is horrible and i think that once as
[Amit Varma]: a podcaster uh you know you start realizing that you need to get the ego out of the way
[Amit Varma]: get the self out of the way and just sit back and listen then you know it would strike me
[Amit Varma]: that at some level that's then going to percolate through to the rest of your behavior with
[Amit Varma]: people where inevitably you will also be in some situations treating some people as a
[Amit Varma]: means to an end so could becoming a better podcaster make you a better human being oh
[Guest]: 100 i'm a better human being as a podcaster now than i was before i was a terrible listener
[Guest]: i was openly called out for being a terrible listener because i have a tendency which my
[Guest]: daughter has gotten from me i believe which is that i can zone out very easily so i could
[Guest]: be talking to you right now and my eyes will glaze a little bit and be looking into the
[Guest]: horizon and i'm imagining something which is more interesting to me than what is going
[Guest]: on right now um people have let it go people have called it out through my life but being
[Guest]: a podcast host you don't have a choice you have to listen have i been guilty of sometimes
[Guest]: owning out of course you will sometimes have those instances in every every so often in
[Guest]: an episode where you're like yeah it's okay it's an autopilot i can glaze off for a few
[Guest]: minutes it's happened but it's made me a better human being because i feel like so when you
[Guest]: really try to drive a conversation to really try to understand the other person right you're
[Guest]: trying to understand what makes them tick which is why i think i do a podcast is because
[Guest]: i talk to like advertising is that is a lot of the people are corporate people but i found
[Guest]: such interesting people with such interesting interests and and thought processes and and
[Guest]: lives that many times that part excites me so much more than the actual business part
[Guest]: of it this part of it is great it's great to get into when you understand all of that
[Guest]: but the nuances of being human is so interesting because i feel people's driving forces people
[Guest]: even what interests them is has always been um something which i always looked at which
[Guest]: i which i found interesting and it gives me a way to kind of dig deeper into that yeah
[Amit Varma]: and actually you know the most rewarding parts of some of my recent conversations are the
[Amit Varma]: sort of you know where you're not talking about the subject per se but just about the
[Amit Varma]: person and their journey which like many people were very very moved by uh you know my episode
[Amit Varma]: with gazala wahab especially the first 90 minutes where we spoke about a personal journey
[Amit Varma]: or i had the grizzled financial journalist tamil bondopadhyay on my show and he started
[Amit Varma]: the show by chatting about how during the lockdown it was so heartbreaking for him to
[Amit Varma]: go out in the streets of bandra and see people who had earlier been vendors now begging and
[Amit Varma]: one of them you know held his hand and took him to a biryani stall and said please buy
[Amit Varma]: me something and you know those glimpses of a person's humanity are i think kind of what
[Amit Varma]: make many of these conversations so rewarding to get back to frameworks for just a moment
[Amit Varma]: and for the very last time if you are to sort of give advice to creators like if there is
[Amit Varma]: someone out there who's thinking that hey i want to do a podcast or i want to do a youtube
[Amit Varma]: show or i want to create whatever you know and can you give me an easy framework which
[Amit Varma]: will which i don't necessarily have to follow all the way around i can discover my own thing
[Amit Varma]: but can you give me an easy framework which will help me get started and think about this
[Amit Varma]: and i think in your newsletter in fact you had actually done this so so what would you
[Amit Varma]: say how should one begin to then approach that problem where you've got a ton of ideas
[Amit Varma]: and creativity and all of that but you want to actually you know do something with it
[Guest]: and bring it together i feel that in today's time to be a creator you need to be able to
[Guest]: play the long games and how long can you do this and whichever choosing what you do as
[Guest]: a creator so important it could be that you write it could be that you do a podcast could
[Guest]: be that you you just make fun videos on on on instagram um could be that you tweet um
[Guest]: i feel that i i've off late i've rediscovered twitter in many ways because i feel that somewhere
[Guest]: the algorithm for me has changed and i've gotten this um a set of people who are giving
[Guest]: me a lot of insights in many things right so you need to find what your medium which
[Guest]: you can do very easily is uh and i say easily because it should be natural to you right
[Guest]: there's a learning curve then you have to take your time to do it and i remember when
[Guest]: i had tanmay uh on my podcast he had said two things um and i found both of them very
[Guest]: insightful one is he said that there are two kinds of youtubers one are people who are
[Guest]: supreme experts who will do one to two videos a month right you're really working on it
[Guest]: pulling it together and stuff and those guys they work on every single nuance the other
[Guest]: kinds of people are doing stuff every day there's almost every day something coming
[Guest]: out it's just that you're hitting you with so much volume that you will find something
[Guest]: that you enjoy and at some point you're almost like waiting to see what you will do tomorrow
[Guest]: and the other thing he said was he said what would you do for no money who should be what
[Guest]: you should be as a creator because at some point you are a creator not because you want
[Guest]: to make money or want to be a star but you're a creator because you really enjoy doing it
[Guest]: in like i follow this guy called ali abidal um on youtube i have discovered him very recently
[Guest]: in between i think like late last year i find his journey so fascinating right for a guy
[Guest]: who was putting up youtube videos on how to prepare for medical exams which i thought
[Guest]: is interesting because he was doing it anyway so very easily could make it but he was interested
[Guest]: in this to now being this person who's not he's taking a break from medicine and doing
[Guest]: all the productivity stuff he's doing because of all the content he's made um such a journey
[Guest]: but i think at every stage he was doing something that he would naturally be able to do would
[Guest]: love to do and it just brings out like that flow of authentic content coming out is so
[Guest]: important because this you can't manufacture this for too long and whenever you try to
[Guest]: manufacture it because oh somebody is because you will find like for instance you'll find
[Guest]: many garyvee clones out there right people will watch garyvee content you will find five
[Guest]: people who are doing exactly what garyvee does i have actually dug into garyvee's framework
[Guest]: which he shares openly about how to create content i think they're fabulous frameworks
[Guest]: like there's so much to learn from how he says how one piece of content can give you
[Guest]: ten thousand pieces or whatever six thousand piece of content and i think that's that's
[Guest]: a great insight do i agree with moses after he says no i find him entertaining in some
[Guest]: find him insightful in some find him repetitive in most but doesn't mean i have to become
[Guest]: him i can learn something from him to make what i would come to me naturally do because
[Guest]: i will never speak like that and if i ever speak about business or speak about entrepreneurship
[Guest]: but i look at again certain nuances of it so i feel what's most important is to find
[Guest]: what you can naturally do all day every day do it quickly so my newsletter for instance
[Guest]: i write like in one flow get done with it on a thursday night or a friday night sometimes
[Guest]: on a saturday morning about half an hour or an hour and a half before it has to go to
[Guest]: people's inboxes um i've been guilty of that a few times but it's something that i know
[Guest]: i can naturally write and if you can't be honest about it and and find that once you
[Guest]: find that then don't think about okay is it going to make me money um am i going to get
[Guest]: too many listeners or viewers etc for the first many many episodes you know you might
[Guest]: do a year two years before you get enough listeners or viewers you might do about a
[Guest]: hundred two hundred like i didn't even look at what my listener count was till i was like
[Guest]: what 60 70 episodes and because i didn't it didn't strike me that i should look at it
[Guest]: i used to always gauge it by who would respond to me on a linkedin and instagram because
[Guest]: i'd have someone write in and ask me a question or give me a point of view or give me something
[Guest]: they liked about it i'm like people are listening enough validation for the show i'm doing but
[Guest]: find that find that level of feedback um find that feedback loop for yourself find that
[Guest]: thing you would love to do and while you do that also explore other avenues and you might
[Guest]: find something you enjoy as much like for me now why do i make workout videos which
[Guest]: is an interesting story right so i grew up a scrawny kid um i don't put on weight easily
[Guest]: which people tell me is a blessing which for me was always okay i'm this um i can very
[Guest]: easily become this scrawny uh person so i've always tried to put on weight i do all that
[Guest]: and at some point decided to be fit because i'm a father because i wanted to carry a layer
[Guest]: around i want to do all that and just get tired very easily because also i quit smoking
[Guest]: what 11 years ago now but i don't think that's still in the system so i i for fun was doing
[Guest]: stuff but i actually make my videos because i enjoy the fact that i'm trying to find the
[Guest]: right track for it and i make everything into a meme so all my videos are literally be using
[Guest]: workouts as a visual for what is a workplace meme and so that's what keeps me going i'm
[Guest]: doing it not a for a what do i find as an interesting visual not necessarily interesting
[Guest]: exercising i do a lot of other stuff which doesn't look great on camera so i don't even
[Guest]: show them i think this is fun this is a great funny meme to do with it and finally i get
[Guest]: to collect enough audio music tracks which i would not normally listen to and use them
[Guest]: in these videos so you will over time find stuff beyond what you normally do focus on
[Guest]: that's because you keep exploring other formats but don't ignore the prime one which you started
[Guest]: with let that go and then find another one so now go on that journey keep discovering
[Amit Varma]: and keep evolving the the first one you built out this is really great advice and i'll kind
[Amit Varma]: of double down on four of the things you said like one i am a big fan of ali abdal as well
[Amit Varma]: in fact in my podcasting course i have this slide where i show ali abdal and there's a
[Amit Varma]: graph in front of him which is something that he shared during a video he made when he reached
[Amit Varma]: a million subscribers and that graph shows an exponential curve and he's talking about
[Amit Varma]: how when he you know he made two videos a week for about half a year so he had around
[Amit Varma]: 50 videos and when he reached the 50th video he hit 1000 subscribers and i'm just thinking
[Amit Varma]: most young people i know they're not going to get to video 50 to hit a thousand the moment
[Amit Varma]: they see the numbers aren't high you know they are going to drop out in fact you know
[Amit Varma]: what is often said about science fiction writers or forecasters is what i think is true of
[Amit Varma]: a lot of creators that they tend to overestimate the short term and underestimate the long
[Amit Varma]: term so they'll create something and they'll think oh i'll get you know so many followers
[Amit Varma]: and so many millions or whatever and that simply isn't true in fact abdal's own sort
[Amit Varma]: of advice to young creators in a subsequent video was that you know if you want to be
[Amit Varma]: a youtube person make two videos a week for two years so that's like 200 videos and only
[Amit Varma]: then see how many subscribers you've got so it is actually in that sense playing the long
[Amit Varma]: game so the advice number one play the long game advice number two flows from this which
[Amit Varma]: is that do it if you love it because if you don't love it you won't be able to do it you
[Amit Varma]: won't be able to do two videos a week for two years unless you really care and you're
[Amit Varma]: really sort of into it and that love again comes from authenticity where you know you're
[Amit Varma]: being true to yourself and everything you do and not trying to copy a gary vee or someone
[Amit Varma]: else and not trying to fill a niche or whatever you would do it anyway and then good things
[Amit Varma]: happen because you do underestimate the long term as well the third one is iterate endlessly
[Amit Varma]: like out of the you know the two models that you spoke about you know what tanmay told
[Amit Varma]: you about i really prefer the second model so much where you're doing something every
[Amit Varma]: day because i think what that model does is that like you shouldn't let perfection be
[Amit Varma]: the enemy of production as one of my guests said in a previous episode if you just do
[Amit Varma]: something like what makes for excellence what makes for excellence is iteration you do something
[Amit Varma]: again and again and again you get better and better at it you know virat kohli does not
[Amit Varma]: become a great batsman by planning how to bat he plays thousands and tens of thousands
[Amit Varma]: of balls in the nets so you gotta do that with whatever format it is you are uh kind
[Amit Varma]: of creating in and finally the fourth one which you know perhaps even i should implement
[Amit Varma]: in some way is be open you know you might find a groove in doing a particular kind of
[Amit Varma]: content and you might think that huh i've got this sorted i've learned this but the
[Amit Varma]: point is that your content is coming from a particular place and there are other kinds
[Amit Varma]: of content which can come from a particular place so you know just because something is
[Amit Varma]: working doesn't mean you should kind of get stuck there you know think about different
[Amit Varma]: ways of sort of doing that and you know these are things i've you know thought a lot about
[Amit Varma]: and i just feel it's important to kind of let you know drive it home to creators especially
[Amit Varma]: the bit about the long game which i feel is um uh so true in another of your newsletter
[Amit Varma]: editions on december 19th you in fact wrote about uh what you call the intimate content
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem and you spoke about how there are like different layers to this so tell me what
[Amit Varma]: you mean by intimate content and what these sort of layers kind of are because i find
[Amit Varma]: that it's a very clear way of sort of uh giving direction to what a young creator might you
[Guest]: know then be able to envisage himself doing so the whole evolution of how creators even
[Guest]: function right is that i feel that many times you look at from the outside you look at it
[Guest]: and i think for me it was because i came from advertising and still am um the idea was okay
[Guest]: you make money off ads but i feel the real thing is that and again this is a learning
[Guest]: from from garyvee because i think he gives everything away for free but then as i saw
[Guest]: more and more youtubers and more and more creators i realized that some things they
[Guest]: would make people pay for and i said okay what do they make people pay for and i realized
[Guest]: that they were all building communities and they were building different kinds of communities
[Guest]: there is this i was listening to uh pivot which is my favorite podcast um and and and
[Guest]: uh i remember that uh i think between scott and and cara so sure they were saying something
[Guest]: and said that every person right now be it a journalist be it a content creator is building
[Guest]: multiple channels of distribution and the more channels of distribution they have the
[Guest]: more stuff they kind of own right because and that adds back to what the earlier point
[Guest]: about trying out newer things is right like imagine every creator who was only putting
[Guest]: stuff on tiktok in india suddenly lost all of that um which is why most of them now are
[Guest]: also on reel is also on merge and everything else and chingari and all the others um so
[Guest]: going back to this i feel that what ends up happening is there are certain things that
[Guest]: people are willing to pay for um but for them to be willing to pay for it you also have
[Guest]: to then kind of build that community of people so it's layers right you have your general
[Guest]: audience who's listening to it happy with that going ahead some people who want to have
[Guest]: more interactions who we then kind of build that community with um where you might give
[Guest]: some extra pieces there and then you'll really find uh this whole concept of super fans and
[Guest]: i look at super fans is an interesting thing right one is when i look at the only fans
[Guest]: model not necessarily in the patreon model right i think only fans has a bad name globally
[Guest]: because of it's used now as a almost a supplement for soft porn but what it traditionally is
[Guest]: is the fact that i'm giving you exclusive content for you to pay me something and what's
[Guest]: also happening now with every like look at sub stack sub stack for me why i started writing
[Guest]: a newsletter was for two reasons um i saw this as an opportunity for me to write again
[Guest]: as something which i've always been wanting to do for the longest time and secondly let
[Guest]: me put out an audio version of a newsletter uh which i thought was interesting to try
[Guest]: out so i said okay it's a it's a private podcast i sent you um it felt so interestingly intimate
[Guest]: because that's the word i use and eventually at some point would someone pay for that i
[Guest]: don't know what i'm writing right now is something to be paid for but it started off as me experimenting
[Guest]: with models which had possible paywalls i know twitter is coming up with a model like
[Guest]: that i know everybody will come to that and eventually you would subscribe to tiers of
[Guest]: stuff that you would want from someone who really relate to and that's actually the way
[Guest]: creators will eventually make the most amount of their money you know i know they all i
[Guest]: know the creators already do make a large amount of the money through that but if you
[Guest]: build that system where a set of people are coming to you for a very specific kind of
[Guest]: content and it doesn't have to be a thousand people or ten thousand people it could even
[Guest]: be a hundred people fifty people but it's intimate because it's made for you it is exclusive
[Guest]: because this is what you really enjoy and you're going deeper into it versus the general
[Guest]: stuff that you would get which everybody else can get as well and the ability to do that
[Guest]: is something which we finally have because of the internet because of the creator ecosystem
[Guest]: and that's something which you can always use so you don't necessarily have to be general
[Guest]: entertainment right i remember in television there used to be this thing about the general
[Guest]: entertainment channel and the niche channel now it's great to be that niche channel because
[Guest]: people want niches so if you are niche even if you are a person making a movie for netflix
[Guest]: your fear niche movie maker i feel that you might get a deal faster than if you're a massy
[Guest]: movie maker because they need to fill those gaps of all those niches versus kind of giving
[Guest]: them that a big general entertainment thing so if you have a specific niche and you can
[Guest]: go deep into that get a captive audience you will find a paying audience and people are
[Guest]: willing to pay for stuff i feel that we sometimes don't give people enough credit that they
[Guest]: would pay for things i think people will they just need to see enough value in it um which
[Guest]: is why the the broader part the general part is so important because that's what gives
[Guest]: them that level of trust that them paying you some money will give them something of
[Guest]: value so the general stuff is very important then you kind of drill it down yeah and that's
[Amit Varma]: fascinating and also the other thing is you know in a country like india with you know
[Amit Varma]: more than a billion people even a niche can be huge and for a creator you don't really
[Amit Varma]: need to think of scale like you know like i think of the sort of the two things creators
[Amit Varma]: need to take into account as being uh you know reach and revenue and you need to think
[Amit Varma]: about what you're doing for each and what you're doing for revenue and uh you know how
[Amit Varma]: that kind of uh balances out and and what i would also say is that one when you think
[Amit Varma]: of niche a niche doesn't need to be like an existing uh niche recognized by everyone else
[Amit Varma]: like say sci-fi is a niche or this is a niche or that is a niche it can just be a niche
[Amit Varma]: that you can build around yourself like you know kevin kelly wrote this essay a decade
[Amit Varma]: ago about a thousand true fans which is a great phrase and which is coming true today
[Amit Varma]: on substack where his argument was if you find a thousand fans who are willing to pay
[Amit Varma]: a moderate amount for you that's enough you don't need more scale than that and on substack
[Amit Varma]: you actually find you know where your standard subscription is a hundred dollars a year you
[Amit Varma]: get a thousand people you are actually um sort of doing well enough and there are tons
[Amit Varma]: of creators on substack who are using that the other point that i would kind of put out
[Amit Varma]: there as i've discovered from my own experience is that you don't necessarily need to make
[Amit Varma]: something subscription or put it behind a paywall to make people pay for it like even
[Amit Varma]: the voluntary model can really work where if people appreciate certain kinds of content
[Amit Varma]: uh they'll be uh kind of perfectly happy to um sort of pay voluntarily now i've taken
[Amit Varma]: tons of your time this is already like three advertising is dead episodes just in quantity
[Amit Varma]: not quality mind you uh so i'm going to sort of end with a couple of final questions so
[Amit Varma]: my penultimate question is really about you know what do you wake up in the morning looking
[Amit Varma]: forward to like one of the benchmarks that i set for myself the simple question is that
[Amit Varma]: every morning when i wake up i want to look forward to the rest of the day so therefore
[Amit Varma]: i want to fill up my tomorrow with something that i know i will look forward to when i
[Amit Varma]: wake up in the morning which doesn't always happen but i'll just then you know maybe order
[Amit Varma]: a biryani or something and that'll do for them but so what is and you are obviously
[Amit Varma]: someone who you know has been reflective has thought about all of this has built frameworks
[Amit Varma]: even redefined your podcast just by thinking about it rather than going with the groove
[Amit Varma]: that it was going on quite well so what excites you uh when you wake up in the morning what
[Guest]: are you looking forward to so if you'd asked me this question pre-covid my answer would
[Guest]: have been a lot simpler um i've i've always been this n2 person to wake up on a monday
[Guest]: morning really excited about going to work which people tell me is the most irritating
[Guest]: thing to have around you uh because i'm like yay tomorrow's monday i'm that person right
[Guest]: i used to be rather um i still but now i'm this person who's waking up every morning
[Guest]: saying okay how many things can i actually do today i tried writing a journal and i realized
[Guest]: i have terrible at writing a journal because i stopped at one question saying why do you
[Guest]: do what you do and i feel like that it changes every day for me so i couldn't define that
[Guest]: and i and i and i bought um this uh journal by ryan holiday and i and i couldn't go beyond
[Guest]: that page and i still have it's been stuck there for like three months now but so i wake
[Guest]: up releasing a set of things i really want to do and and it it no longer is one thing
[Guest]: and that's what keeps me excited is that in a day if i only did work for glitch or if
[Guest]: i only did advertising is dead or only a newsletter i would not be a happy person if in a day
[Guest]: i'm doing five really different things five different audiences um and i say audiences
[Guest]: because uh and i speak about this uh to many people these days is when my first episode
[Guest]: with ranveer came out for varun doogi show there was a commenter guy who said even though
[Guest]: it's your first podcast you've done a great job it's really exciting i'm waiting for more
[Guest]: right and i and i wrote to him as i i actually was smiling because i was like it's great
[Guest]: it's a very different audience and i have a fresh set of people to kind of get um and
[Guest]: and so that's what excites me what excites me every morning is okay so much to do i've
[Guest]: also learned to wind down by evening because that at some point gets exhausting and i have
[Guest]: had like weekends weeks where i've just crashed and my brain stops to function but so which
[Guest]: is i have a wind down system every night where post 8 9 p.m i slowly it's i still i am doing
[Guest]: a ton of stuff which is that my pace is slower and i drink turmeric tea which is my way to
[Amit Varma]: wind down i messed up your wind down system tonight apologies for that this has been a
[Amit Varma]: wind down right and okay so i'll break my final question into two because something
[Amit Varma]: that you said as usual made further sparks go off which is that you know you're doing
[Amit Varma]: multiple things and what it seems to me is that you were doing a set number of things
[Amit Varma]: and those expanded so you were doing the glitch and then you were doing glitch plus advertising
[Amit Varma]: is dead and then you add newsletter and then you add the varun doogi show and then you
[Amit Varma]: have the working out videos and all of that and it's expanding what do you do for like
[Amit Varma]: are there any hacks you'd like to share in terms of a knowledge management and be productivity
[Guest]: my way of knowledge management is that i scribble stuff down and i used to do it on paper now
[Guest]: i do it on the phone or the ipad because you lose paper and that's my thing so i have a
[Guest]: bunch of these snippets either like screenshots or just like stuff i've written down which
[Guest]: i keep and i feel that's invaluable because we all believe that ideas will stick in our
[Guest]: head but they come to us in the worst possible time right just when you're going to go to
[Guest]: sleep sometimes when you're half asleep when you're in the shower always note them down
[Guest]: they'll help you in the future that's how i write my newsletter half the time my newsletter
[Guest]: stuff is from some random piece which i i wrote a one line somewhere and i go back to
[Guest]: that so and that's how i write every week so that's really uh you know one way of doing
[Guest]: it the other way is to constantly i mean i find apps that really help me i found readwise
[Guest]: like i mentioned earlier which keeps that i found this fabulous app called next big
[Guest]: idea which i think has been one of the revelations of of my reading life because many times it's
[Guest]: not just about finishing a book i i sometimes don't end up finishing books but sometimes
[Guest]: also about finding the right books and next big idea was started by malcolm gladwell adam
[Guest]: grant and daniel pink and a few others they give you a curation of different non-fiction
[Guest]: books and they have the author talk about five insights from their book and if you like
[Guest]: the five insights you might and they give an amazon link to go buy it and their subscription
[Guest]: also has modes where they'll even send you a couple of books every month which i haven't
[Guest]: done but i subscribe to this part of it it lets me a kind of get a bunch of ideas for
[Guest]: stuff that's happening people are writing about it's also made me buy a bunch of those
[Guest]: books but not every book has to be read fully in many cases every book some books you just
[Guest]: need want to get the main insight out of it so that's been one big driver for because
[Guest]: for me i have this need to get as much information about every random thing into my head but
[Guest]: i also realize you only have certain amount of time and with a mind like mine you will
[Guest]: zone out of a book very easily so i don't end up finishing a lot of books and i tend
[Guest]: to try and go back to them over time and just find different people to follow in the same
[Guest]: way right so i'm a huge geek culture fan and fanboy of all things marvel dc everything
[Guest]: right so like i spent four hours watching the snyder cut i watched it straight up and
[Guest]: i watched it the next day again because puja had only seen one hour and she'd gone into
[Guest]: sleep and but then i after read that and post that i'll then run through all the youtube
[Guest]: videos of people discussing smaller nuances smaller easter eggs i'll do that so which
[Guest]: means i've easily spent a good six to eight hours around the snyder cut if not more um
[Guest]: in the span of like say a week but that for me is great information like it's some i'll
[Guest]: store that somewhere it will help in some conversation somewhere and weirdly enough
[Guest]: those are things i never had to scribble it's the most serious stuff which is frameworks
[Guest]: or like information or book stuff you ask me something about a random thing that happened
[Guest]: in a zack snyder movie i will remember it verbatim like you ask me what happens in in
[Guest]: a scene in tridev i will tell you what happens um so i guess something's never changed yeah
[Amit Varma]: and in you know one of your newsletters feb 6 you spoke about what you call quote the
[Amit Varma]: balanced information diet stop quote where you spoke about how you need to satisfy your
[Amit Varma]: heart your mind and your belly so obviously some of the going down rabbit holes as it
[Amit Varma]: were are you know satisfying different aspects of that and another penultimate question before
[Amit Varma]: i get to the final question because this came out of that you mentioned somewhere else that
[Amit Varma]: uh you know that that uh because of being a father you're consuming a lot of content
[Amit Varma]: you want otherwise for example you've seen frozen many many times and you absolutely
[Amit Varma]: love it you read her books and all of that so does that help that does having this sort
[Amit Varma]: of new window into content build a new appreciation and therefore make you a sort of a different
[Amit Varma]: person as well because you're consuming stuff differently and looking at content differently
[Guest]: yeah for sure i want to do a dad podcast at some point i will definitely do it i feel
[Guest]: i feel dads don't have information uh out there but the stuff i consume with leah um
[Guest]: and i find some of it beautiful that i've discovered some really interesting things
[Guest]: um because i feel a lot of the books that are available for kids now talk about empathy
[Guest]: they talk about like she has a book which the the main focus is we're all the same but
[Guest]: we're different right and i find the fact that these are books available now which i
[Guest]: don't think we had when we were growing up right which is which is amazing so even if
[Guest]: we will talk to her about the color of someone's skin or to talk to her about some people have
[Guest]: privilege and some people don't at the age where she is she's three and a half um she's
[Guest]: able to understand some of those concepts because of the stuff she consumes like even
[Guest]: when i look at frozen and we've seen it like some 50 000 times or if not more in this house
[Guest]: it's a simple thing right you're not having when you talk about love you're not talking
[Guest]: about love just between a man and a woman you're talking about the love between two
[Guest]: sisters and so just some concepts which you can get out of that and i think she understands
[Guest]: and she's like she's understood what death is because of frozen which i feel is a as
[Guest]: a darker subject but because she asked us that will at some point everyone go to the
[Guest]: dark sea which is what you know elsa and anna say her parents have kind of gone to and so
[Guest]: some concepts are understood and it makes me understand also understand human beings
[Guest]: right and how certain pieces kind of come to them how you can teach and this side of
[Guest]: content for me has really opened up just like the possibilities of how someone as young
[Guest]: could be taught concepts which you might feel are very evolved and you also find some really
[Guest]: random stuff like there's a book jimmy fallon wrote where he was trying to get his daughter's
[Guest]: first words i think daughter was son's first words to be papa and he wrote a fun book where
[Guest]: it's basically all the animals saying moo and papa so basically papa was all over it
[Guest]: daughter's first words were mama but and you also find stuff like that just like a random
[Guest]: book it has nothing in it but it's so enjoyable and i get to play with lego again after a
[Guest]: long time so i'm back to that so yeah it's amazing you suddenly discover different sides
[Amit Varma]: of interest which engineer can resist playing with lego and that's a lovely quote by your
[Amit Varma]: dads don't have information that could be the title of your podcast if you ever do one
[Amit Varma]: okay so now my final final question which is that you know listeners of the scene and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen are always asking for recommendations what should i read what should i watch you
[Amit Varma]: know and you of course are in a sense an omnivore of great content but if you had to pick a
[Amit Varma]: handful of things i won't put a number on it but a handful of things which you feel
[Amit Varma]: were life-changing for you or you recommend to everyone whether they watch it or they
[Guest]: read it or whatever um you know what would they be so i've been interested in stoicism
[Guest]: a lot in the last year or so year or two and ryan holiday opened it up for me because he
[Guest]: normalized that whole thing for anyone who's struggling with the way the world is there's
[Guest]: a book called stillness is the key it's a fabulous book it digs into age-old philosophy
[Guest]: but it's just something which i think for the way the world is right now um with everything
[Guest]: that's going on around you that book has like it's helped me like i go back to that many
[Guest]: times stillness is the keys is fabulous to kind of go to in the other ones that i've
[Guest]: read in recent times i'm just kind of thing so if no one's read the ride of a lifetime
[Guest]: by bob eiger right again a fabulous book just like because i feel arguably one of the best
[Guest]: ceos of this time and just the fact that um and i was listening to him on masters of scale
[Guest]: with reid hoffman and it's a two-part uh conversation he talks about how you can actually make so
[Guest]: many acquisitions as a conglomerate like disney but imagine they acquired marvel acquired
[Guest]: uh lucasfilm and acquired pixar but let them still have that identity and that exist as
[Guest]: those brands it's so separate from disney so it's so much to learn from his journey
[Guest]: and the stuff he's kind of been through so right of left i'm on a more business side
[Guest]: of things if i had to recommend a podcast in the last couple of years i've listened
[Guest]: to i'd say two of them one is inside voice which i mentioned earlier there's something
[Guest]: called inside voice which is not what this is i sometimes said this some once and someone
[Guest]: posted the other one so i realized there was another one inside voices it's a head gum
[Guest]: podcast so in case the thing comes in fabulous way to kind of dig into the mindsets of podcast
[Guest]: hosts and my favorite fictionish podcast in recent times is something called blockbuster
[Guest]: season one's a story of how george lucas and steven spielberg came up with the blockbuster
[Guest]: genre of cinema season two is james cameron i'm not a james cameron fan but i love that
[Guest]: season because it just made me like him a little bit more than because i didn't i don't
[Guest]: necessarily i didn't like avatar that maybe i'm biased in that front of things so that
[Guest]: would be my podcast in terms of shows i don't watch as much content as i should on streaming
[Guest]: but if you haven't watched wonder vision watch wonder vision i feel it's the riskiest thing
[Guest]: anyone can do to make a show like that considering it was marvel making it because every episode
[Guest]: is almost like a different genre and they've imagine take a marvel property and making
[Guest]: it into a sitcom which sounds really bizarre so that so even people who don't necessarily
[Guest]: subscribe to superhero stuff have enjoyed it because it just feels so different but
[Guest]: in a non-geek side of things there's this docu-series with dr. dre and jimmy ivine called
[Guest]: the defiant ones arguably one of my favorite docu-series to go back to i go back to it
[Guest]: many times i think the story is just generally so interesting i'm not even getting into do
[Guest]: i am i pro dr. dre not but i think the story of just how that piece worked is is just fabulous
[Guest]: to look at and and i've always kind of uh it's one of those places i kind of go back
[Guest]: to um and i kind of re-watch it sometimes and can get some nuances from it so that and
[Guest]: there's the last one is um there's these guys called the minimalists they do a podcast they've
[Guest]: done a documentary called minimalism they have a youtube channel as well they have a
[Guest]: new uh documentary which is on netflix uh which i think is called less is more or something
[Guest]: like that um as a person who is not a minimalist and everybody laughs when i say i'm watching
[Guest]: something around minimalism because i'm the opposite of it i'm a hoarder in many ways
[Guest]: i find that the way they talk about it to be so interesting that it makes me want to
[Guest]: watch it and i feel that that says something for the fact that someone who is never going
[Guest]: to be a minimalist i know that i'm not going to but i'm so fascinated by it because of
[Guest]: how they speak about it so it's a i i think that's an interesting one to watch well you
[Amit Varma]: know even if lives aren't minimalistic frameworks can be in fact the best frameworks are uh
[Amit Varma]: the most stripped down and basic ones i suppose varun thanks thanks so much for you know gracing
[Amit Varma]: me with your presence and giving me so much of your time no guest has ever given you as
[Amit Varma]: much time as you've given me today so thanks a lot for that and thank you so much this
[Guest]: is fabulous i never thought i could i could have actually do this longer conversation
[Guest]: on a podcast so i i've finally um this is the longest i've ever done an episode so great
[Amit Varma]: thanks a ton
[Amit Varma]: if you enjoyed listening to this episode head on over to the show notes where i've given
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of links about all the things we spoke of including all of varun's work you can also
[Amit Varma]: check out his website varundugi.com and follow him on twitter at varundugi you can follow
[Amit Varma]: me on twitter at amit varma a m i t v a r m a you can browse past episodes of the scene
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen at seen unseen dot i n thank you for listening
[Amit Varma]: did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show you can go over to seen unseen dot i n slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking thank you